Towards the Automatic Generation of Fictional Ideas for Games
Maria Teresa Llano

Michael Cook

Christian Guckelsberger

Goldsmiths, University of London
United Kingdom

Goldsmiths, University of London
United Kingdom

Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt
Germany

Simon Colton

Rose Hepworth

Goldsmiths, University of London
United Kingdom

Goldsmiths, University of London
United Kingdom

Abstract
The invention of fictional ideas is often a central process in the creative production of artefacts such as poems, music, paintings and games. Currently, fictional
ideation is being studied by the Computational Creativity community within the WHIM European project. The
aim of WHIM is to develop the What-If Machine, a software system capable of inventing, evaluating and presenting fictional ideas with cultural value. In this paper we explore the potential applications of the What-If
Machine in the context of games. Specifically, we propose ways in which the What-If Machine can be used
as an assistant for the design of games, by providing
ideas about characters, the environment, etc., as well as
a creative system during gameplay, through interesting
interactions with the player.

Introduction
In Marc Saltzman’s book Game Design: Secrets Of The
Sages (Saltzman 1999) the author reminds the reader “if reality was that fun, people wouldn’t play video games”. The
quote is intended as a tongue-in-cheek reminder to game designers that providing the player with an interesting experience is more important than staying true to how the real
world works. However, it also serves as a snappy reminder
that the interplay between fact and fiction is a major part of
why people play games. Fictionality is vital to video games,
whether in creating fantastical situations and imaginative
game mechanics, or conspicuous in its absence in games
which pride themselves on accurately simulating certain aspects of the real world.
Artificial intelligence is being integrated into almost every
aspect of game development and play. Examples include design assistants like Tanagra (Smith, Whitehead, and Mateas
2010) and the Game-o-Matic (Treanor et al. 2012), as well
as software which interacts directly with the player, such as
the Viewpoints AI system (Jacob et al. 2013). A major aspect of both designing games and their play is the creation
of fictional ideas or concepts, and engagement with existing
fictions. To build systems which can perform these tasks, or
help people perform them, we need an understanding of fictionality and how it relates to video games.
c 2014, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Understanding fictional ideation, the process of producing ideas which are in part or entirely imaginary, and building systems to automate this process, is one of the main objectives of Computational Creativity (CC), an area of Artificial Intelligence which involves designing software that
exhibits behaviours perceived as creative by unbiased observers (Colton and Wiggins 2012). WHIM1 , a CC project,
aims at developing the What-If Machine, which will be able
to invent, evaluate and express fictional ideas that serve as
the basis for cultural creations in different contexts. The
work presented here describes possible applications of the
What-If Machine in the context of games.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: first we give
a brief overview of existing fictional ideation approaches.
Then we provide a brief description of the meaning of fiction within the context of this paper. We next assess how
fictionality is applied in five video games, chosen from different genres and gameplay forms, in order to identify the
possible areas in which fictional ideation could be applied in
this context. We follow by proposing how the What-If Machine can be used as a design assistant for game developers
and as an in-game system during gameplay. We finish with
some conclusions and some future research directions.

Background
A central aspect of creativity is idea generation, and many
CC researchers have focussed on the study of fictional
ideation in the last decade. Pereira (2007) implemented a
system based on the psychological theory of Conceptual
Blending put forward by Fauconnier and Turner (2008).
By linking two theories about different subject material,
novel concepts emerge from the approach. More specifically,
through conceptual blending partial matches are identified
between the domains of two input concepts and then carefully selected in order to form a novel ’blended’ concept.
Using blending to reason about such fictional ideas was harnessed for various creative purposes, including natural language generation (Pereira and Gerv´as 2003), sound design
(Martins et al. 2004), and for the invention of character models for video games (Pereira and Cardoso 2003).
In addition, fictional ideation has been applied in the creative generation of characters for stories. Examples of this
1

www.whim-project.eu

are the Party Quirks (Magerko, Dohogne, and DeLeon 2011)
and the Flux Capacitor (Veale 2014) systems. The former is
a digital improvisational theatre game that allows the generation of imaginary characters by manipulating their stereotypical attributes, e.g. a clumsy ninja. The Flux Capacitor,
on the other hand, defines conceptual start and end points
to transform the description of characters within a narrative,
e.g., from good to evil, from rich to poor, etc. These characters are computationally modelled as dynamic blends; i.e.
they can be used as the input for story generators and developed throughout a narrative. The generation of fictional
objects that can play functional roles in stories has also been
studied by Li and Riedl (2011). This is achieved by using
partial order planning and analogy to find relations between
typical properties and events of different objects, giving rise
to new concepts such as a phone that can transmit the flu.
In the context of WHIM, Llano et al (2014) developed
three methods to automatically generate fictional ideas. Two
of these approaches are based on conceptually altering facts
from the ConceptNet2 and Reverb3 knowledge bases. These
approaches work by altering the relations that link realworld concepts in order to produce fictional relations between them. The third approach is through bisociative discovery, which identifies linking terms between two different domains in order to produce new associations between
them. The ideas proposed in this paper are based on the ConceptNet method. A detailed description and example outputs
from this approach are given later where we present how we
envisage the method can be tailored to the context of games.

Fiction and Ideation
Many definitions of fiction rely upon either an assumed distinction from the factual, or the ability of fictions and facts to
destabilise the other when subjected to critical investigation.
Fiction is difficult to define, and although there is no room
to discuss these theoretical issues here, Jean-Marie Schaeffer presents a useful overview of these problems as part of
the Living Handbook of Narratology (Schaeffer 2012). He
also offers an account of fiction which we use for the work
presented here:
a representation portraying an imaginary/invented universe or world (Schaeffer 2012, Paragraph 9).
In particular, Schaeffer makes a distinction between fiction and fact: that ‘factual narrative is referential whereas
fictional narrative has no reference (at least not in “our”
world)’ (Schaeffer 2012, Paragraph 2). The type of fictional
ideation we present in relation with video games follows this
principle; in other words, it has value based on its capacity
for promoting or reinforcing an imagined world, or its capacity for suggesting a mechanism by which the player can
interact with that world.
In the games given as examples in this paper, story-world
and fictionality interact in different ways, from the relatively
self-contained imaginary world of Mario Bros. through to
the imaginative space of Tetris, which although served by
2
3

conceptnet5.media.mit.edu
reverb.cs.washington.edu

fictionalised objectives, could be said to reduce narrative to
the experience of playing the game itself. Fiction and narrative are both important elements in the construction of
an immersive experience of games and therefore fictional
ideation, as envisioned in WHIM, has the potential to become a useful tool in their conception and development.

Fictionality in Games
The fictionality of games is crucial to their breadth as a creative and entertainment medium. On an aesthetic and artistic
level, the fictionality of a setting in a game, the narrative and
other elements convey messages and evoke emotion in the
player through the use of artificial scenarios. It shares this
property with any other creative medium, like film, painting or narrative fiction. As an entertainment medium, too,
fictionality allows a user to be immersed in literally fantastical scenarios, which often rely on their fictional nature
to present exciting, improbable or compelling worlds and
events. Most importantly for video games, however, is fictionality of a systemic nature. While the popularity of simulation games, which strive to be realistic, is undeniable, most
game designers acknowledge that fictionality in the mechanical systems of games is key for their enjoyment. This ranges
from small adjustments that make a game more enjoyable to
play, such as the ability of a player to withstand being shot
without dying, right through to creating mentally challenging and engaging game settings which cannot be constructed
in the real world, such as being able to cast magic or connect two points in space with portals. Games are wrapped
in fiction, from their surface-level aesthetics to their deepest
embedded systems, whether it is through very strong to very
weak connections to reality.
In this section we identify some fictional elements, used
in video games, which could potentially be supported by the
What-If Machine. The aim of this analysis is to comprehend
how developers get real world concepts into games as well as
how these are distorted. In particular, we explore how reality and fiction are portrayed in five well known video games
in order to create imaginative and interesting scenarios. The
selected games vary greatly in their environment, goals and
gameplay mechanics; moreover, there is a different degree
of realism and fiction portray in every game. As a result,
this selection allow us to identify some of the many ways in
which a game feature can be manipulated through fictionality. We selected the following games from different genres:
Frogger (Konami 1981): An arcade game where players
have to help frogs get to the other side of a busy road
and pass through a river avoiding numerous hazards. The
player must guide the frog and prevent it from getting hit
by a car, or falling into the river. There is a time limit to
guide each frog to its destination.
Granny’s Garden (4Mation 1983): An educational game in
which the player is tasked with finding and returning the
children of a King and Queen, who have been captured by
an evil witch. The player must avoid the witch and various
obstacles by answering a series of puzzles correctly.
Tetris (Pajitnov 1984): A puzzle game in pieces of blocks
shaped as geometric figures are manipulated by the player

while they move from the top to the bottom of the screen.
The player must create horizontal lines without gaps
which disappear as soon as they are formed. The speed of
the descending blocks increases with every level, and the
player must not allow them to reach the top of the screen.
Super Mario Bros. (Nintendo EAD 1985): A platform game
in which the main character, Mario, has to overpass several obstacles in order to rescue a princess from an evil
turtle-like creature. The player must prevent Mario from
being killed by various hazards in the way like falling into
precipices or running out of time.
Call of Duty 4 – Modern Warfare (Infinity Ward 2007): A
first-person shooter game seen from the perspectives of a
US Marine and a British SAS Commando. The purpose
of the game is to complete missions which are involved in
several global conflicts. During each mission, the player
must avoid being killed by the enemies.
We explore four aspects of the games mentioned above
which we believe the What-If Machine can support, namely
characters, environment, game mechanics and narrative.
We observe the level of reality/fictionality being portrayed
by identifying realities, half-truths or fictions. Specifically,
we determine realities to be depicted by elements whose
intrinsic properties are very close representations of their
real-world counterparts, half-truths are elements for which
an intrinsic property deviates completely from reality but
all other aspects remain truthful, and fictions are elements
of the games for which the intrinsic properties deviate completely from reality as we know it. In particular, we analyse
how fiction is achieved by trying to answer two questions:
“what do we believe was intended to be represented by the
game designer?” and “how is it actually represented in the
game?”. Note that the examples selected in this analysis
have been manually selected through observation by the
authors by following the criteria mentioned above.
Realities: real world elements are used in games in order
to create interesting, yet believable scenarios. In Frogger
and Call of Duty, the games’ settings are very close to
reality. Frogger has roads which cars go on and rivers which
logs float along. The scenarios in Call of Duty replicate
similar elements to those seen in war zones: the countryside,
guns, people, uniforms, and so on. Call of Duty mechanical
controls are mostly realistic as well, the character can
move, run, crouch, weapons must be reloaded and bullets
inflict wounds; while in games like Tetris, where the play
environment is more simple, reality is captured through the
daily and trivial action of fitting objects by maximising the
space. However, in games like Granny’s Garden, where the
environment is static, reality is retained in aspects such as
the main character, i.e., by using the player as the main
character of the game. This is largely because there is no
character to play or control as such. Other characters and the
narrative voice address the player in the 2nd person, further
erasing distinction between the two. Reality can also be
depicted through the visual representation of characters. In
Super Mario Bros, Mario is a plumber with common human
abilities such as running and jumping, and Frogger uses

green frogs that can hop like their real-world counterparts.
Half-Truths: using elements which retain most real
features but only deviate in small aspects is a common
approach used in games. In Frogger, a river is used as part
of the setting; however it is not a faithful depiction of a real
river since it flows both ways. Furthermore, although the
look and feel of the frogs resemble reality, their size is the
same as a lot of the other elements of the game, such as cars.
In Granny’s Garden, the environment is mostly realistic in
that objects do what you expect them to do. However, there
are magical elements of the garden that are imaginative
constructs. Similarly, animals are able to talk to the player
and yet in all other respects these animals retain real-world
characteristics, for example, the bee can sting the dog but
the butterfly cannot. In Tetris, moving blocks are used as
the element to be controlled; however, the movement of
the blocks is constrained to the sides and to rotations of
90 degrees only. Game mechanics can also be manipulated
using half-truths, e.g., in Super Mario Bros, Mario collects
coins as a way of increasing the score; however, the coins
simply disappear from the screen when they are touched
by Mario. Finally, in Call of Duty, the environments are
modelled on real locations but they don’t reflect the specific
geography or landmarks. Non-player characters are mostly
realistic, being civilians, combatants or allies, but their
behaviour is structured to facilitate the story; for example,
allied soldiers will not advance on a location until the player
does, to give the player a feeling of control.
Fictions: in a world with its own resources and rules, fictional elements are largely used to create exciting games.
Ending conditions, i.e., when the game has reached a state
where the player has lost, are an example of this. In Frogger,
fiction is used to model the ending conditions of the game
in two ways: by making frogs die if they go into the water and by using time limits for frogs to complete the action
of crossing. The character goal in Granny’s Garden is the
most fictive element of the game. The children of a King
and Queen being captured by a witch and the player having
the task of rescuing them, is an entirely fictional narrative.
In a simple environment like that of Tetris, fiction is used to
model a way of liberating space. This is achieved by simply
making disappear horizontal lines from the screen (when the
condition of length is met). In Super Mario Bros, the character requires special abilities in order to overcome the various
obstacles and increase the score. This is achieved by using
elements from the environment, like mushrooms, to make
Mario grow double his size in order to protect him from being killed by the enemies and to provide him with more than
one life in the game. In fact, he can collect more lives by
actions such as collecting 100 coins. The environment, supposed to depict a Mushroom Kingdom, has various fictional
elements; for instance, invisible bricks, which if found, provide Mario with coins or powers and a time limit per level
that takes away a life from Mario when it runs out. Finally, in
Call of Duty, the character is the feature with most fictional
elements. Being in war-like zones, the character would be in
the middle of shootings and life threatening situations; how-

Flowchart to generate fictional ideas for the context of Disney characters. The top ConceptNet process finds instances
of animals that are filtered through the WordListCategoriser
process. ConceptNet is used again to find properties of these
animals, and the information is then rendered through the
TemplateCombiner processes to produce the fictional ideas.
The result is saved through the TextSaver processes.

Figure 1: ConceptNet-based fictional ideation process.
ever, a lot of damage can be inflicted before dying, wounds
heal if the player remains in cover (out of the way of gunfire) for a few seconds and a bullet to the head has the same
impact as a bullet to the leg.
We observed that features of games can be depicted as
close or as far away from reality, from simple game environments like Tetris to more complex games like Mario or Call
of Duty, where the rich environment allows for more opportunities to exploit fictionality. Next, we will explore in more
detail the potential role of the What-If Machine in the context of games based on the insights gained from this section.

Automated Fictional Ideation for Games
In (Llano et al. 2014) we developed a method for the automatic generation of fictional ideas based on ConceptNet, a semantic network of common sense knowledge produced by web mining techniques at the MIT media lab (Liu
and Singh 2004). Mined knowledge is represented as facts,
which comprise relations between concepts in a networklike structure, and a score, from 0.5 upwards, which estimates the likelihood of the relation being true, based on the
amount of evidence mined. Example facts found in ConceptNet are: [camel, IsA, animal, 7.0] and [animal, CapableOf,
hear sound, 2.0]. The method consists of altering the world
modelled by ConceptNet. The technique uses different inversion methods, like negating a relation between two concepts, assigning properties to concepts that are opposed to
what is found in the knowledge base or are simply not found
in it, changing the scope of a relationship, etc.
To carry out the ideation experiments over ConceptNet we
used FloWr (Charnley, Colton, and Llano 2014), a framework for implementing creative systems as scripts over processes that can be manipulated visually as flowcharts. The
flowchart in Figure 1 illustrates the use of FloWr to create
fictional ideas for the context of Disney characters. First, the
ConceptNet process at the top finds instances of animals by
searching for facts [X, IsA, animal]. Then, a WordListCat-

egoriser process is used to remove outliers such as [apple,
IsA, animal]. ConceptNet processes are used again to find
facts about animals that are specified through the relations:
CapableOf, Desires, LocatedNear, UsedFor, NotCapableOf
and HasA. The identified facts are then rendered through
the TemplateCombiner processes. For instance, the fact [Cat,
Desires, Milk] is rendered as “What if there was a little cat
who was afraid of milk?”. Finally the results are stored in
disk through the TextSaver processes.
We have tested this methodology by generating fictional
ideas in different contexts, namely for Disney characters,
e.g., “What if there was a little cat who learned how to
ride a bike?”, surrealist art, e.g., “What if you painted a
dolphin that was made out of gold?”, superhero characters,
e.g., “What if there was a police officer who had feather
wings like a bird?” and Kafkaesque inspired characters, e.g.,
“What if there was a woman who woke up in the sky as a
bird, but could still speak?”.
In this section, we will outline how we envisage the application of the What-If Machine to the context of games in
two roles: as a design assistant and as an in-game system –
the examples used in this section are manually invented by
the authors unless stated otherwise.

The What-If Machine as a Design Assistant
One of the main objectives of CC research is to explore the
potential of computers to be fully autonomous systems, able
to create and evaluate material with minimal input, as well
as systems which are designed to help people to be more
creative, whether at the level of an inspirational system, a
tool or a collaborator. CC researches believe that creative
industry practitioners, as well as the general public, would
come to appreciate software that is being creative rather than
merely generative by being exposed to artificially generated
artefacts and the reasoning behind their creative behaviour.
The WHIM project is part of this endeavour by highlighting the potential of idea-centric approaches as creative software collaborators. Here we explore this possibility in the
context of games, where a fictional ideation system such as
the What-If Machine can be used as a creative collaborator
by both amateur and professional game developers. Specifically, we are interested in the capabilities of the What-If Machine as an assistant during the design of games by offering
the developer a series of ideas based on input constraints.
The examples above illustrate the potential of the system
to propose interesting game characters. For instance, ‘a little
cat who learned how to ride a bike’ can be used as a character for children’s games, or ‘the police officer who had
feather wings like a bird’ could be a superpower acquired
by a policeman character if the player achieves certain conditions. However, the What-If Machine is currently unable
to generate ideas like that of a frog that is the same size as
a car, or enemies that only advance when the player does.
This is because the knowledge base does not include facts
that compare two concepts by their attributes, e.g., size, or
quantitative knowledge to allow the user to make such comparisons. Enriching the knowledge base with this kind of information is a way of tackling this problem; however, this
solution is not scalable. An alternative is to use systems like

Visuo (Gagn´e and Davies 2013), which estimates quantitative information for input descriptions of scenes by transferring quantitative knowledge to concepts from distributions
of familiar concepts in memory.
Game mechanics would be an interesting aspect to explore from the perspective of WHIM, in particular, game
ending conditions seem to have a great potential. Frogs that
die when falling into water, or lives taken away when time
runs out, are examples of the kind of ideas that could be generated. Imagine the What-If Machine is input with the information that pipes are an element of the environment in Super Mario, and that Mario is a plumber. Gathering information about plumbers and pipes, the What-If Machine identifies the following facts from ConceptNet: [plumbers, CapableOf, fixing leaky pipes], [pipes, UsedFor, carry water],
[water, UsedFor, drown] and [human, CapableOf, drown].
Then, the idea of Mario drowning due to leaking pipes is
suggested as an ending condition, with the alternative of
Mario fixing them, using his ability as a plumber, before the
water reaches a high level. To achieve this kind of reasoning,
the What-If Machine must be extended with sentiment analysis, in order to identify for instance, that drowning is a bad
consequence, as well as inference techniques to find chains
of facts that lead to ideas like the one above.
We will also generate different renderings to increase the
value of fictional ideas. These renderings could be potentially used to target progress conditions in games. For instance, Granny’s Garden uses puzzles as the way of progressing in the quest of finding the missing children. Currently, we are working on generating What am I? riddles to
render fictional ideas. The clues provided in the riddles include facts describing the object(s) involved in the fictional
idea and a hint to the transformation that took place and that
must be guessed. These riddles could be provide conditions
to progress if the player manages to answer them correctly.
Game environments like that in Super Mario Bros offer a lot of opportunities to exploit fictionality, contrary to
games like Tetris, where the environment is more abstract: a
screen which does not provide a frame of comparison with
reality for the What-If Machine to build on. Ideas such as
those produced in the surrealist art context mentioned earlier are examples of how the What-If Machine could be used
to transform the environment. Imagine for instance, enemies made out of gold which can only be destroyed with
fire. Or more complex cases like extending the scope of the
objects in the environment; for instance, having guns that
shoot bullets with curve trajectories, or stairs that go as high
as heaven, etc. Again, to achieve these kind of transformations, we would require knowledge about the limitations of
these objects, such as maximum height, as well as comparative information that allows us to determine for instance,
that heaven is higher than any stair can reach.
Similarly, ideas for the story plot could be supported by
the What-If Machine. The Flux Capacitor system (Veale
2014) generates interesting character transformations which
can be used as part of stories. For instance, ‘a King that becomes a slave’ could be used as the goal of a game in which
the player must prevent the decline of a great sovereign.
Moreover, in unpublished work, Veale and Valitutti are also

working on generating ideas about utopias and dystopias,
and the consequences that they bring. For instance, the idea,
‘A world with fewer zombies is a world with more chaos’,
could be used as part of the story of a game in which zombies are helpful because they kill enemies, and their absence
would result in an unmanageable number of hostile troops.

The What-If Machine as an In-game System
There are many examples of games in which the primary
mechanic involves creativity on the part of the player. Jason
Rohrer’s Sleep Is Death4 tasks the player with responding to
a story being told to them by another player (the game can
only be played with two people). The emphasis is on creative
decision-making, and improvising responses to whatever the
story produces. In Max and the Magic Marker5 , the player
can draw on the game world to create objects that become
part of the game’s physics system. This allows the player to
solve puzzles by drawing new level elements – weights to
counterbalance catapults, for instance, or staircases to bypass dangerous areas.
We have already described the potential of the What-If
Machine as a tool for designers, but the aims of the project
also make it a potential source of new types of gameplay,
too. The system’s ability to create and modify fictional concepts could make it a component of games which involve
dialogue or creative exchanges between the player and the
game, along the lines of a single-player version of Sleep Is
Death or similar. Consider a narrative-led game in which the
player and the game take turns in telling part of the story.
The player might try and swing the narrative in favour of the
hero by inventing new characters or events – perhaps they
suggest that the hero finds a sword in a cave. The What-If
Machine can dynamically propose ideas that play off this
and push back against the player. For instance, ConceptNet contains the facts: [sword, HasA, sharp edge] and [sharp
edge, UsedFor, cut thing], which would allow the system to
respond to the player by making the sword blunt, and therefore useless for cutting things.
This example does not offer much in the way of gameplay,
but it illustrates the kinds of experience that the What-If Machine might offer if integrated into a game. This improvisational back-and-forth is integral to many forms of gameplay,
particularly pen-and-paper role-playing games such as Dungeons and Dragons. The ability to repair or adjust a scenario
on-the-fly with invented ideas could add a huge amount of
flexibility to many computer RPG systems, and perhaps even
contribute to entirely new kinds of games by allowing the
player to engage in invention.

Conclusions and Future Work
Fiction is a mechanism extensively used in a lot of aspects of
games. In the WHIM project, we are interested in building
a software system, the What-If Machine, that automatically
generates, evaluates and presents fictional ideas, a system
that can be used as a creative collaborative partner, or as an
autonomous agent, in different contexts of cultural creation.
4
5

www.sleepisdeath.net
www.maxandthemagicmarker.com

We have explored the role of fictionality by identifying
how fiction is used in five well known video games, and proposed two potential roles of the What-If Machine in this context: as a game design assistant and as an in-game system.
Specifically, we identified the potential of the What-If Machine to provide ideas in the creation of characters, imaginary environment, game mechanics and narrative. Moreover,
being game design a holistic approach, we believe the WhatIf Machine can work as an assistant during the entire design
process. We believe the system will be able to produce connected fictional ideas which refer to different aspects of a
game but that represent compound settings for it. Causality
and event associations are particular mechanisms the WHIM
team are currently exploring in order achieve this kind of
output from the system.
We have identified ways in which the What-If Machine
can be extended to produce more elaborate fictional ideas,
which are applicable to the context of games as well as
other types of cultural artefacts. In particular, a lot of fictions are formed by comparing attributes between concepts
that belong to different domains; however, current knowledge bases, like ConceptNet, do not provide the type of information required to make these comparisons. Currently we
are working on two ways of acquiring this knowledge: i) by
extracting information from Metaphor Eyes6 (Veale 2013), a
system used for metaphor processing that mines information
from the web, and ii) by exploring the use of systems such as
Visuo (Gagn´e and Davies 2013), to estimate quantitative information by transferring knowledge from familiar concepts
in memory. Additionally, we will integrate inference chaining techniques and sentiment analysis into the generation of
fictional ideas. We believe this will allow us to explore different scenarios that can arise from a fictional idea.
Being able to measure the value of an idea is an important
aspect of our research. Currently we evaluate the ideas generated by the What-If Machine through an inference chaining technique inspired by the hypothesis that ideas can be
evaluated through narratives involving them. In (Llano et al.
2014) we carried out a crowd sourcing study to asses this
technique. We found a positive correlation of how people
assess the quality of fictional ideas with our chaining technique. We also found that emotional response, narrative potential and level of expectation are key elements of people’s
general impression of fictional ideas. As future work, we
plan to implement rendering methods that will take narratives for an idea and produce interpretations of them which
add value. We will experiment with the number and nature
of scenarios arising from an idea and test the hypothesis that
presenting a moderate amount of supporting information can
motivate people to expand the idea, and thus begin to own
and appreciate it more.
We plan to carry out crowd sourcing studies to determine how people react and rank fictional ideas and different
renderings of them in the context of games. A first prototype of the What-If Machine is available online7 . Users can
parametrise the system for exploration, or simply click the
6
7

ngrams.ucd.ie/metaphor-eye/
www.whim-project.eu/whatifmachine/

‘I’m feeling lucky’ button. This implementation will be used
to gather feedback for audience modelling, and help promote
fictional ideation as a major new area for CC research.
As an educational activity, we asked two 15 year-old students to explore the online prototype and choose one fictional idea as the basis for a video game. They selected the
idea “What if there was a little whale who couldn’t swim?”
and came up with a novel game that involves humorous and
social elements (see the appendix). The students also mentioned that although the system is an early version, they liked
being able to work out which facts had been inverted and
playing around with the options to get ideas about the object
they chose. The success with this small activity is promising and shows that there could well be scope for the What-If
Machine to assist in the design of interesting cultural artefacts. We plan to work more formally with creative writing
and film students in order to analyse the possible interactions with the system, and we hope to show that automated
fictional ideation has much potential to increase.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Brandon Wilson and Leo Cordery
Smith for exploring the online prototype of the What-If Machine and for writing a game description from one of the
generated ideas. We are also grateful to the members of the
Computational Creativity Group at Goldsmiths for their useful feedback, and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This research was supported by EPSRC
grant EP/100206X as well as through EC funding for the
project WHIM 611560 by FP7, the ICT theme, and the Future Emerging Technologies FET programme.

Appendix: Lenny the Whale

Figure 2: Sketch of the game Lenny the Whale.
A video game description created and written by Brandon Wilson and Leo Cordery Smith, two 15 year-old students, based on the fictional idea “What if there was a little
whale who couldn’t swim?” taken from the online What-If
Machine prototype.
1. This video game would be about a whale who
couldn’t swim and his family were migrating for winter. As he couldn’t swim, he was either going to have
to learn how to swim or he would be left behind.

2. The aim of the game would be to teach the whale how
to swim by completing various levels in the game and
talking to people you meet around the ocean who will
teach you how.
3. The back story of the game is the whale has 10 other
brothers and sisters who can all swim but because
he was born with a deformed fin which meant he
couldn’t swim as well as the other whales.
4. The main character would be called Lenny. He is a
whale who is incapable of swimming.
5. The character would encounter the following obstacles in his way:
• Primarily, he would try to learn how to swim by
being taught by people he meets.
• Secondly, he would try and overcome his fear of
drowning and being away from his mother.
• Thirdly, he would have to grow accustomed to people laughing at and mocking his deformed fin.
• Then, he would have to learn to utilise his small fin
to make him move faster.
• Finally, he would have to swim across the ocean
with his family when they migrate in the winter.
6. The player scores points by completing objectives
quicker such as him completing tasks set by the people who teach him how to swim.
7. This game might appeal to a younger audience as the
main character tackles issues which most children
face in school such as bullying or acclimatising to a
new surrounding or new people.
By Brandon Wilson and Leo Cordery Smith.

References
4Mation.
1983.
Granny’s Garden.
4Mation.
www.4mation.co.uk/cat/granny.html.
Charnley, J.; Colton, S.; and Llano, M. T. 2014. The FloWr
framework: Automated flowchart construction, optimisation
and alteration for creative systems. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Computational Creativity.
Colton, S., and Wiggins, G. 2012. Computational Creativity: The final frontier? In Proceedings of the 20th European
Conference on Aritificial Intelligence, volume 242 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications. IOS Press.
Fauconnier, G., and Turner, M. 2008. The way we think:
Conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden complexities.
Basic Books.
Gagn´e, J., and Davies, J. 2013. Visuo: A model of visuospatial instantiation of quantitative magnitudes. The Knowledge
Engineering Review 28(3):347–366.
Infinity Ward. 2007. Call of Duty: Modern warfare. Activision. www.callofduty.com.
Jacob, M.; Coisne, G.; Gupta, A.; Sysoev, I.; Verma, G. G.;
and Magerko, B. 2013. Viewpoints AI. In Proceedings of
the 9th Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive
Digital Entertainment. The AAAI Press.
Konami.
1981.
Frogger.
Sega/Gremlin.
www.happyhopper.org.

Li, B., and Riedl, M. O. 2011. A phone that cures your flu:
Generating imaginary gadgets in fictions with planning and
analogies. In Intelligent Narrative Technologies IV, 2011
AIIDE Workshop, volume WS-11-18 of AAAI Workshops.
The AAAI Press.
Liu, H., and Singh, P. 2004. Commonsense reasoning in
and over natural language. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems, volume 3215 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 293–306. Springer.
Llano, M. T.; Hepworth, R.; Colton, S.; Gow, J.; Charnˇ
ley, J.; Lavraˇc, N.; Znidarˇ
siˇc, M.; Perovˇsek, M.; GranrothWilding, M.; and Clark, S. 2014. Baseline methods for
automated fictional ideation. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computational Creativity.
Magerko, B.; Dohogne, P.; and DeLeon, C. 2011. Employing fuzzy concept for digital improvisational theatre. In
Proceedings of the 7th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, AIIDE 2011.
The AAAI Press.
Martins, J.; Pereira, F.; Miranda, E.; and Cardoso, A. 2004.
Enhancing sound design with conceptual blending of sound
descriptors. In Proceedings of the 1st Joint Workshop on
Computational Creativity.
Nintendo EAD. 1985. Super Mario Bros. Nintendo.
mario.nintendo.com.
Pajitnov, A.
1984.
Tetris.
Spectrum HoloByte.
www.tetris.com.
Pereira, F., and Cardoso, A. 2003. The horse-bird creature
generation experiment. The Interdisciplinary Journal of Artifitial Intelligence and the Simulation of Behavior 1(3):257–
280.
Pereira, F., and Gerv´as, P. 2003. Natural language generation from concept blends. In Proceedings of the AISB
Symposium on AI and Creativity in Arts and Science.
Pereira, F. 2007. Creativity and AI: A Conceptual Blending
Approach. Mouton de Gruyter.
Saltzman, M. 1999. Game Design: Secrets of the Sages.
Brady Games.
Schaeffer, J.-M. 2012. Fictional vs. Factual narration, In:
H¨uhn, Peter et al. (eds.): The living handbook of narratology.
Hamburg: Hamburg University Press.
Smith, G.; Whitehead, J.; and Mateas, M. 2010. Tanagra:
A mixed-initiative level design tool. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital
Games, 209–216. ACM.
Treanor, M.; Blackford, B.; Mateas, M.; and Bogost, I.
2012. Game-O-Matic: Generating videogames that represent ideas. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Procedural Content Generation in Games.
Veale, T. 2013. A service-oriented architecture for computational creativity. Journal of Computing Science and Engineering 7(3):159–167.
Veale, T. 2014. Coming good and breaking bad: Generating
transformative character arcs for use in compelling stories.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computational Creativity.

