The Painting Fool in New Dimensions
Simon Colton
Computational Creativity Group,
Department of Computing,
Imperial College, London, UK.
www.thepaintingfool.com
The Painting Fool is software which we hope will one day
be taken seriously as a creative artist in its own right. We
have recently implemented many improvements that enable
the software to produce more interesting pictures, characterised along the following axes:
• Artistic: The Painting Fool is able to produce more messy
pictures via a process which turns a set of colour regions
into a single line. The heuristic nature of this process introduces unpredictable corrections often resulting in large paint
strokes that add visually to the pieces produced.
• Time and Movement: The software can now output animations, whereby paint/pencil strokes dance around the screen,
occasionally coming together to produce coherent pictures.
• Spatial: The Painting Fool can generate 3D virtual galleries and produce Google-maps style online browsing
mechanisms. This framework will provide an arena for the
software to undertake more provocative framing exercises,
e.g., by writing wall text, curating its own pictures, etc. We
will use the same technology to produce 3D sculptures using
evolutionary approaches, and to construct and paint scenes
by placing 3D models in a virtual world.
• Size: The software can now produce very large images
containing literally billions of pixels. This has enabled
pixelation-free printing up to A0 sizes and beyond. Such
images take a long time to produce, so we have also implemented abilities for the software to perform preliminary
sketches for approval beforehand.
• Interaction: The software can use various third party programs (such as context-free design grammars and evolutionary art software) in order to generate paintings from
a perceived imagination. The Painting Fool also has access to all of the web-sourcing and graphics techniques
available in the Computational Creativity Collective (see
ccg.doc.ic.ac.uk/collective/).
• Efficiency: The software can now simulate so-called handover-hand painting, whereby multi-core processors are used,
with each thread controlling a different paint brush. In addition to greatly increasing efficiency, this also produces more
painterly effects, as the paints from the multiple brushes mix
in unpredictable ways.
• Intellectual: The Painting Fool has increased abilities to
create meaningful collages which illustrate news stories.

The more sophisticated painting behaviours in The Painting Fool have enabled us to produce large pieces for an exhibition entitled “No Photos Were Harmed/Growing Paths
from Seeds”, held in Paris in March 2011. This represented
an artistic dialogue between Simon Colton and architect
Eileen Chen, where we explored the nature of handing over
creative responsibility. With her piece “LeGrandParis.com”
Eileen took her lead from the skyline of Paris (thus handing over some creative responsibility to generations of architects), and in her piece “Generation of 13 Nudes”, she
handed over some creative responsibility to the medium (watercolours) by taking advantage of the often unpredictable
nature of the flow of water. With both pieces by The Painting
Fool (portrayed in figure 1), an amount of creative responsibility was handed over to the software. The vernissage for
the event was attended by around 100 people, and the notion
of autonomously creative software was much discussed.

Figure 1: The Dancing Salesman Problem (3.5m × 1m, simulated acrylic paints on photo paper) and the Four Seasons
(2m × 1m, simulated pastels and pencils on photo paper)
pieces in the Paris exhibition.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Computational Creativity

165

