Assessing Exploratory Theory Formation Programs
Simon Colton
Mathematical Reasoning Group
Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH1 1HN
United Kingdom

Theory Formation Programs
in Pure Mathematics
Broadly speaking, machine learning programs are asked
to identify a single concept given a set of examples and
some background knowledge. Mathematical theory formation programs, such as the AM program, (Davis & Lenat
1982) and the HR program, (Colton, Bundy, & Walsh 1999),
are also given a set of examples and some background knowledge. However, they are not asked to find a single concept,
but rather to explore the domain and attempt to gain some
understanding of it. Because the domain is mathematics,
there are a range of ways by which the program can gain an
understanding of the domain, including inventing concepts,
performing calculations, making conjectures, proving theorems and finding counterexamples. The HR system is able to
perform all of these activities in domains such as group theory, where it employs the Otter theorem prover, (McCune
1990), and MACE counterexample finder, (McCune 1994),
to prove and disprove theorems.
Whereas machine learning programs are in general goal
directed, theory formation programs perform forward chaining. To control this, measures of interestingness for concepts are derived and employed so that an effective best first
search through the space of concepts can be achieved. For
example, measures based on the clarity of the definition of
a concept are common in theory formation programs and
help increase the yield of understandable concepts. Theory formation programs are not limited to just mathematics.
We have recently enabled HR to work in “train theory”, in
which it invents concepts which involve properties of trains
as described in the original Michalski problem, (Michalski
& Larson 1977). For example, it invents the concept of trains
where each carriage has a different shape.
In general, the kinds of concepts which machine learning
programs and theory formation programs can invent in pure
mathematics are very similar, but theory formation programs
have to avoid many uninteresting concepts. A good example
of this is that the Progol ILP program, (Muggleton 1995),
Copyright c 2000, American Association for Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

will easily learn the integer sequence:

		




This concept is present in HR’s search space, but HR will
not invent the concept because the search strategy prohibits
it (because the sequence is not interesting).

Research Problem Statement
We wish to define some concrete qualitative and quantitative
measures for the performance of exploratory theory formation programs.
In the next section we list three of the many subjective
ways to assess a scientific theory formation program. Following this, we suggest two quantitative measures for the
performance of a theory formation program, based on applying the program to machine learning tasks. Finally, we
summarise with a brief assessment of the problem.

Subjective Measures
	




is not interestBy saying that the sequence
ing, we have been subjective. Ideas about the interestingness
of individual concepts can often be turned into general rules
and even concrete calculations which assess the interestingness of a concept. For example, HR chooses to develop concepts with a variety of examples, which means it avoids the
above sequence because it only contains one number. Each
theory formation program has its own measures for interestingness and we have surveyed five such programs in (Colton,
Bundy, & Walsh 2000c), and attempted to derive some common approaches to the assessment of interestingness.
Heuristic searches based on these measures of interestingness are intended to increase the quality of the theories produced. Assessment of the theories themselves is also usually subjective, and likewise assessments of the programs
which produce the theories. We list here some of the subjective ways in which theory formation programs have been
assessed historically, and highlight some of the drawbacks
of these assessments.

The number of ‘classically interesting’ concepts or conjectures it re-invents in a theory. For example, AM reinvented square numbers and prime numbers, found Goldbach’s conjecture and the prime factorisation theorem,
and gained great credit for doing so. Certainly, a program which re-invents no classically interesting concepts
or conjectures should be assessed poorly. However, what
constitutes a classically interesting concept is highly subjective, and in areas such as train theory, this assessment
is not applicable. Moreover, it can encourage the authors
of programs to continually fine tune their programs so that
they eventually reach particular concepts. Certainly, AM
was criticised for, amongst other things, the fact that some
of its heuristics were very specialised and often only used
once in a session, (Ritchie & Hanna 1984).
The number of ‘genuinely interesting’ new concepts or
conjectures the program invents. Unfortunately, it is usually difficult to know in advance even whether a concept
is new, never mind interesting. Vald´es-P´erez classifies
machine discovery programs as either those developed to
model theory formation or those developed to assist experts, (Vald´es-P´erez 1999). An example of the latter is the
Graffiti program, (Fajtlowicz 1988), which has produced
many very interesting conjectures in graph theory which
some of the best minds in the field have tackled. With
programs which assist experts, the user can often quickly
identify the importance of a concept. Programs which
model theory formation play an important role in artificial intelligence and cognitive science. However, their
authors are often not experts in the domain of interest and
the programs are not designed to actually add to the domain. This makes assessment of the novelty and importance of the concepts produced difficult. Lenat originally
believed AM had invented a new type of number: those
with more divisors than any smaller number. However,
these turned out to be highly composite numbers defined
much earlier by Ramanujan. We had a similar experience
with refactorable numbers, (Colton 1999), but have since
redeemed the situation, (Colton, Bundy, & Walsh 2000b).
The overall quality of the theory. This approach involves
examining an example theory produced and grading the
interestingness of the concepts in the theory. An overall
score is then assigned to the theory, based on the average
interestingness of the concepts. This is again subjective,
and it is difficult to tell which concepts are genuinely interesting. This is a good measure to use while developing
a theory formation program: examine the output and alter the program so that the yield of interesting concepts
increases (based on the subjective notions of interesting
being used). If this can be done in a general way, the
program will benefit greatly from such an analysis. For
example, if a program was consistently producing concepts with very complicated definitions, we could define a
clarity measure and encourage the production of concepts
with greater clarity. If we develop a program in this way,
we will require different notions of interestingness to assess the program, as it will obviously score well using the
criteria employed to assess the theory while developing it.

Quantitative Measures
Machine learning programs perform in a reactive way. They
are given a set of examples, some background knowledge
and a categorisation of the examples. They are then asked to
use the background information to define a concept which
achieves the categorisation. For example, we could give the
ILP program Progol, (Muggleton 1995), the set of integers
up to 10 and background information which includes the
concept of divisors of integers.
we then supply this cat   If
 	   
    
egorisation of the integers:
, Progol will learn the concept of even numbers (ie. divisible by
2) because when we use this concept to categorise the integers 1 to 10 into even numbers and non-even numbers, the
categorisation is above, as required.
If we now imagine a more pro-active approach to machine
learning, where the program is given a set of examples and
some background knowledge, and we know that after some
given time limit, it is going to be given a categorisation of
the examples which it must learn a concept for. In the interim, the program can do anything which will enable it to
provide an answer quickly when the categorisation is finally
presented. For example, we could give the program a set of
trains and background knowledge in terms of describing the
trains, eg. carriages, objects in carriages, wheels, etc. We
then give it five minutes to prepare, and return to ask it why
a particular set of trains are going East. If the program has
used its time effectively, it would reply immediately, for example: the trains going East have exactly four carriages. If
the program has been completely effective with its preparation time, we will be able to give it any categorisation of the
trains, for example into trains going North, South, East and
West, and it will be able to supply a concept immediately
which explains their behaviour.
This imaginary pro-active experiment describes the function of a theory formation program. This enables us to define
a measure for the success of the program. We could simply
count the number of concepts the program comes up with,
but an inferior program might produce thousands of concepts which categorise the trains in only a few ways. Therefore, we are actually interested in the number of different
categorisations which are achieved by the set of concepts
a theory formation program comes up within a given time
limit. If a program comes up with 100 categorisations of,
say 8 example trains, after a given time limit, it is more
equipped to carry out machine learning tasks than a program
which only manages to come up with 50 categorisations.
Note that the number of different ways to categorise a set
of  objects is defined as the

   th

   (Bell
Bell
 
  number,



 1934).
For exThe Bell numbers are:
ample, there are 15 ways to categorise the numbers 1 to 4:
  

  
 
  
   
    


 
    	
  
  	
 
    	
   	

   
  
   
    	
  	   
 
    
 
    
    

 	

  
  
	


   
    	
      
 
  	   
 	
    
    	
    
       	

We have performed some experiments with HR in number theory and found that it can produce concepts categorising the integers 1 to 5 in all 52 ways. Similarly, we have
achieved around 90% of the 203 categorisations of the integers 1 to 6. Note that we report an increase in the number of categorisations HR finds in a given time limit when a
cooperative agency, rather than a single copy of HR is employed, (Colton, Bundy, & Walsh 2000a).
A measure of the interestingness of concepts which we
can project to measure the entire theory, is the clarity of the
concepts. If a program has a clarity measure for individual
concepts, then the average clarity of a concept in the theory
can be used as a measure for the theory itself. Even if a
clarity measure is not used in the heuristic search, it should
still be possible to derive some measure of the complexity of
the definitions of the concepts produced.

Assessment of the Research Problem
We have so far employed a variety of measures to assess
the HR program in the hope that the combination will prove
sufficient [the ‘shotgun’ approach, (Bundy 1998)]. Some of
these measures are subjective and some are more concrete.
The research problem we state here is to derive some additional qualitative and quantitative measures for theory formation programs, specifically those which work in scientific
domains. In particular, we do not yet have an objective way
to measure the average quality of the concepts produced in
a session. We hope to adapt some of the ideas developed in
(Sommer 1996) and similar papers to help assess the theories produced by exploratory theory formation.
Such concrete measures will not only allow us to assess
the performance of a program, but to determine whether particular heuristics improve its performance, which was an initial motivation for this problem. Further, we hope to use
such measures to compare and contrast theory formation
programs. Investigation of why programs perform badly
with respect to these measures will allow future developers
of theory formation programs to implement better systems.
There are many ways to exhibit an understanding of a
domain. We have presented one based on machine learning tasks: an ability to immediately explain categorisations
presented. For example, HR has completely categorised the
numbers 1 to 5, so we can ask it to provide a property shared
by any two of them which the others do not share, and it
will always supply an answer immediately. Another way to
exhibit an understanding of the domain is to present an intelligent question. In mathematics, this entails proposing a
conjecture which is simple to state, difficult (but not seemingly impossible) to prove, and certainly not obvious. Perhaps the first step towards defining measures is therefore to
determine the ways in which an understanding of the domain can be communicated by a theory formation program.
From this, we may be able to measure how much it really
understands the domain it has explored.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by EPSRC grant GR/M98012.

References
Bell, E. 1934. Exponential numbers. American Mathematics Monthly 41:411–419.
Bundy, A. 1998. Personal communication.
Colton, S.; Bundy, A.; and Walsh, T. 1999. HR: Automatic
concept formation in pure mathematics. In Proceedings of
the Sixteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
Colton, S.; Bundy, A.; and Walsh, T. 2000a. Agent based
cooperative theory formation in pure mathematics. In Proceedings of the AISB-00 Symposium on Creative & Cultural Aspects and Applications of AI & Cognitive Science.
Colton, S.; Bundy, A.; and Walsh, T. 2000b. Automatic
invention of integer sequences. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Colton, S.; Bundy, A.; and Walsh, T. 2000c. On the
notion of interestingness in automated mathematical discovery. International Journal of Human Computer Studies
Forthcoming.
Colton, S. 1999. Refactorable numbers - a machine invention. Journal of Integer Sequences 2.
Davis, R., and Lenat, D. 1982. Knowledge-Based Systems
in Artificial Intelligence. McGraw-Hill Advanced Computer Science Series.
Fajtlowicz, S. 1988. On conjectures of Graffiti. Discrete
Mathematics 72 23:113–118.
McCune, W. 1990. The OTTER user’s guide. Technical
Report ANL/90/9, Argonne National Laboratories.
McCune, W. 1994. A Davis-Putnam program and its application to finite first-order model search. Technical Report ANL/MCS-TM-194, Argonne National Laboratories.
Michalski, R., and Larson, J. 1977. Inductive inference
of VL decision rules. In Proceedings of the Workshop in
Pattern-Directed Inference Systems (Published in SIGART
Newsletter ACM, No. 63).
Muggleton, S. 1995. Inverse entailment and Progol. New
Generation Computing 13:245–286.
Ritchie, G., and Hanna, F. 1984. AM: A case study in
methodology. Artificial Intelligence 23.
Sommer, E. 1996. An approach to measuring theory quality. In Proceedings of the 9th European Knowledge Acquisition Workshop.
Vald´es-P´erez, R. 1999. Principles of human computer collaboration for knowledge discovery in science. Artificial
Intelligence 107(2).

