Lakatos-style Automated Theorem Modification
Simon Colton and Alison Pease
Abstract. We describe a flexible approach to automated reasoning,
where non-theorems can be automatically altered to produce proved
results which are related to the original. This is achieved through an
interaction of the HR machine learning system, the Otter theorem
prover and the Mace model generator, and uses methods inspired
by Lakatos’s philosophy of mathematics. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach by modifying non-theorems taken from the
TPTP library of first order theorems.

1 Background
Current automated deduction systems are only capable of three types
of output when given a conjecture: proof that it is true, proof that it
is false, or that the conjecture is still open. We believe that greater
flexibility and ability to better handle ill-specified problems would
improve reasoning systems. We have implemented a theorem modifier system, TM, which is able to take in a conjecture, try to prove
it and if unsuccessful (either because the conjecture is too hard to
prove or because it is false), produce modified versions of the conjecture which it can prove. For instance, given the non-theorem that
all groups are Abelian, TM states that it cannot prove the original
result, but it has discovered that all self-inverse groups are Abelian.
TM is inspired by methods from [2]. Lakatos argued that mathematics developed in a much more organic way than its rigid textbook presentation of definition-theorem-proof would suggest. He
saw mathematics as a process in which, via patterns of analysis which
he categorised into seven methods, conjectures and proofs are gradually refined but never certain. In [2], Lakatos outlined a heuristic approach which holds that mathematics progresses by a series of primitive conjectures, proofs, counterexamples, proof-generated concepts,
modified conjectures and modified proofs. The two methods we have
drawn on for TM are Lakatos’s exception-barring methods: piecemeal exclusion and strategic withdrawal. The former works by generalising from a counterexample to a class of counterexamples and
then excluding this class from the faulty conjecture; and the latter
by considering the examples supporting a conjecture, finding a concept which covers a subset of these, and limiting the domain of the
conjecture to that of the concept. Put formally, given the conjecture
, counterexamples such that
,
and positive examples such that
:
piecemeal exclusion finds a concept
such that
, and
, then modifies the conjecture to:


	
	
  	   	  	




	



    	

      	
  	
		 	
  	

withdrawal finds a concept  such that !  , and
 strategic


	
   
 	"#, then
modifies
		 the
	 . conjecture to:
$ Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom;
email: sgc@doc.ic.ac.uk
% School
of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom; email:
alisonp@dai.ed.ac.uk



In order to automate these methods we need a program which attempts to prove a conjecture (we do not want to modify conjectures
which can be proven automatically); one which generates supporting and counterexamples, and one which generates concepts to cover
a set of entities. To this end TM interacts with the Otter theorem
prover [3], the Mace model generator [4], and the HR machine learning system [1]. Otter is a first order resolution theorem prover which
has been used for many discovery tasks in algebraic domains, e.g.,
[5]. Mace is a model generator which employs the Davis-Putnam
method for generating models to first order sentences. HR takes in
objects of interest, such as groups, and background concepts such
as the operator of a group, and forms a theory containing concepts,
conjectures and proofs. Its concept formation functionality works by
applying one of 15 production rules to one (or two) old concepts
to generate a new concept. For instance, it might pass the concept
element through the size production rule to produce the function
, i.e. the size of a group.

& '(	)+* ,-./1032546*

2 The Theorem Modifier System

7  

7

TM works by taking in a conjecture of the form
where
is a conjoined set of axioms, and
the conjecture a user wishes
to prove/modify/disprove. We have so far limited TM to algebraic
domains, such as group theory, where there is a single operator
which satisfies the axioms of associativity, identity, and inverse.



Stage 1: Given a conjecture, TM first performs two preliminary
checks to see whether it is worth modifying. These are:
(i) if Otter can prove in a user-specified period of time that the
, then TM reports this and returns the
conjecture is true, i.e.,
proof;
(ii) TM negates the conjecture and invokes Otter to try to prove the
negation.

7  

Stage 2: If unsuccessful, then TM performs a further check before
invoking MACE and HR – whether the conjecture is true if and only
if we limit the objects in the domain to (a) the trivial algebra, i.e.
if
), or (b) non-trivial algebras, i.e. if
. This check is a type of modification
inspired by Lakatos’s exception-barring methods, where (a) the only
supporting example is the trivial algebra, so we limit the domain to
this (a type of strategic withdrawal), and (b) the only counterexample
is the trivial algebra, so we exclude it form the conjecture (a type of
piecemeal withdrawal). We apply these methods separately at this
stage as it is often the case that a theorem is true only for the trivial
algebra, in which case the theorem is usually uninteresting. The
opposite case, that the theorem is true for everything but the trivial
algebra, is rare.

9:'
;=<'!)><?		A@ 
7 B8





C
';=<D'F)3
E <G			H@ 
7

Stage 3: If the conjecture gets beyond these checks, then TM has
the chance to modify it. To do this;
(i) TM invokes MACE to generate two sets of algebras; the first
containing those which support the conjecture, and the second those
which contradict it.
(ii) These sets are then passed to HR as objects of interest, as well as
the conjecture, from which it extracts the core concepts. It uses this
input to produce a theory, for a user-specified number of steps.
(iii) TM then identifies all the specialisations of the algebra (such
as Abelian or self-inverse algebras) which HR has invented. TM
extracts those which describe only the algebras which support the
conjecture (or a subset of them). For each extracted specialisation,
, TM forms the modified conjecture
by adding
to the axioms.
(iv) Otter is invoked to see which of these modifications can be
proved, and any which are proved are presented to the user.

 7  I 	H 

I

I

Stage 4: Finally, TM evaluates whether its modifications are likely
to be interesting to the user. It does this by testing whether:
(i) the only example to satisfy M is the trivial algebra, in which case
;
TM invokes Otter to check whether
(ii) the concept is a redefinition of the conjecture statement, for
instance,
is the condition that a group is Abelian, when the
original conjecture was all groups are Abelian, i.e. the modification
is that all Abelian groups are Abelian. If every supporting example
has the property prescribed by M, then TM uses Otter to try to
, (b)
, (c)
. TM marks
prove: (a)
these as probably uninteresting, though still reports them to the user,
as it may be that the equivalence of
and
is surprising and
non-trivial, and hence the modified conjecture interesting.

7 J I @K9:'
;=<'D)L<?			

I

7  I @  	


I @ 

I

I  

Note that this process of modifying conjectures by specialising
them is an implementation of Lakatos’s strategic withdrawal method.
However since TM instructs HR to use its negate production rule,
will also be produced.
for every specialisation , the negation
contained all the falsifying examples for
Hence, if the examples of
the conjecture, then
would describe a subset of the supporting
examples, and hence would be used in a modification attempt. Therefore TM also uses piecemeal exclusion to form the modifications.

I

I

I

I

3 Testing and Evaluation
We have tested the hypothesis that TM can find meaningful modifications to non-theorems by using the TPTP library [6]. From theorems in the group (GRP), field (FLD), ring (RNG) and combinatory
logic (COL) domains in this library we generated 89 non-theorems
by removing axioms, changing/removing quantifiers, altering variables and constants, and altering bracketing. To this set we added 9
of the non-theorems in TPTP to make a test set of 98 non-theorems.
In addition to testing the hypothesis, we investigated how we could
improve performance - where performance was measured by (a) the
number of non-theorems for which TM was able to find an interesting modification, and (b) the number of interesting modifications
produced per non-theorem. We considered a modification to be interesting if (i) TM evaulated it as interesting in stage 4, or (ii) it showed
that the orginal conjecture is true only if the algebra is trivial, or (iii)
it comes with the caution that the specialisation may trivially make
the theorem true, but is not an obviousl restatement of the conjecture.
In order to investigate how performance could be improved, we
altered the amount of time Mace, Otter and HR were each allowed.
Mace only found a few more examples with extra time, which did

not affect the specialising concepts that HR found. Similarly giving
Otter more time did not improve the performance of TM – giving it
extra time did not result in it proving a difficult problem. Therefore,
we concentrated on altering the way in which we ran HR. We ran
three sessions using TM to attempt to modify each of the 98 nontheorems. Otter and Mace were given 10 seconds, with Mace looking
for examples up to size 8, and HR was allowed 1000 theory formation
steps in the first two sessions, and 3000 steps in the third session. In
the first session, however, the ability to use equivalence conjectures
to find specialisations was turned off [1].
Session
Equivalent to trivial algebra
No valid modifications
Only redefinition modifications
Valid modifications with caution
Valid modifications no caution
Total valid modifications
Average number of modifications per non-theorem
Average time to generate modifications (s)

1
24
11
8
18
37
79
0.8
73

2
24
10
8
18
38
80
1.3
120

3
24
9
8
18
39
81
3.1
253

Table 1. Results from modification attempts on 98 non-theorems

TM produced interesting modifications for 79, 80 and 81 out of
98 of the non-theorems respectively, i.e., 81%, 82% and 83%. We
believe that such a success rate is very encouraging. These figures
don’t appear to provide much evidence of improvement by running
HR for longer and allowing it to use information from equivalence
conjectures. However, if we look at the average number of modifications produced in the three sessions, we see that using the setup as in
the first session, on average TM found 0.8 proved modifications per
non-theorem, but using the setup as in the third session, it found 3.1
modifications per non-theorem. The drawback is that the time taken
to produce these modifications triples.
As an illustrative example, a non-theorem from ring theory
(RNG031-6) states that the following property, , holds for all rings:
where is the additive identity element. Mace found 7 supporting examples for this, and 6 falsifying examples. HR produced a single specialisation concept which
. Otter
was true of 3 supporting examples:
then proved that holds in rings for which HR’s invented property
holds. Hence, while TM couldn’t prove the original theorem, it did
prove that, in rings for which
, property holds.
The specialisation here has an appealing symmetry.
The TM system demonstrates increased flexibility in automated
theorem proving, gained by integrating deductive, inductive and
model based techniques. We believe that such flexibility will play an
important part in the next generation of automated reasoning sytems,
and that the combination of areas such as machine learning, constraint solving and theorem proving is inevitable for AI to progress.

:M;=MN6MO	PN6	PNMN6MQ		)LRTS6	



RTS

E W?	
U <V;WD<VNV<X)LWPH<PYZ<)L

5[N)LAY:	



REFERENCES
[1] S Colton. Automated Theory Formation in Pure Mathematics. SpringerVerlag, 2002.
[2] I Lakatos. Proofs and Refutations: The logic of mathematical discovery.
Cambridge University Press, 1976.
[3] W McCune. The OTTER user’s guide. Technical Report ANL/90/9,
Argonne National Laboratories (ANL), 1990.
[4] W McCune. A Davis-Putnam program and its application to finite firstorder model search. Technical Report ANL/MCS-TM-194, ANL, 1994.
[5] W McCune and R Padmanabhan. Automated Deduction in Equational
Logic and Cubic Curves, LNAI 1095. Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[6] G Sutcliffe and C Suttner. The TPTP problem library: CNF release
v1.2.1. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 21(2):177–203, 1998.

