No Photos Harmed / Growing Paths from Seed – An Exhibition
Simon Colton∗ and Blanca P´erez Ferrer
Computational Creativity Group, Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK
ccg.doc.ic.ac.uk

Figure 1: The Dancing Salesman Problem - original sketch.

Abstract

1

We report on an exhibition centered around a dialogue between a
Computational Creativity researcher presenting artwork generated
by a computer program and a classically trained artist taking inspiration from the computational processes. The main purpose of
the exhibition was to place software-generated art (where the program takes on some aesthetic and generative responsibilities, rather
than acting as a mere tool) in both an art-production context and
an art-historical context, by exploring the themes of creative responsibility and the loss of aura surrounding a work of art. A secondary purpose was to highlight the fact that computer generated
art can be representational without relying on digital photographs
as inputs. We describe certain technical hurdles we overcame in
the production of the exhibition and the feedback we gained, in addition to elaborating on how the event and the project as a whole
fits into an art-historical context. We conclude with brief details
of another exhibition involving art generated by the same software
system, where the notion of progression was explored; by describing a planned exhibition, where autonomy and independence in the
system will be highlighted; and by providing a partial roadmap for
progress towards autonomously creative software in the visual arts.

The Painting Fool (www.thepaintingfool.com) is a computer program that we hope will one day be taken seriously as a creative
artist in its own right. This is an earnest endeavour of the type
against which careers can be weighed. Success here will require
both technical innovations and some societal changes in the opinions of people with respect to the creativity (or lack thereof) in software. As such, the project falls squarely within the field of Computational Creativity [Colton et al. 2009] [Cardoso et al. 2009], where
researchers study how to build software that can take on some of
the creative responsibilities in arts and science projects.

CR Categories: I.3.2 [Computer Graphics]: Graphics Systems—
Stand-alone Systems

We have also worked with some machine vision techniques, including face detection and in particular emotion detection, which drove
an empathic painting project described in [Colton et al. 2008], of a
similar nature to that described in [Shugrina et al. 2006]. We have
also given the software the ability to appeal to simple aesthetic criteria such as colour distribution, symmetry and contrast in the assessment of the images it produces [Colton 2012a], in addition to
more sophisticated evaluation criteria, such as those described in
[den Heijer and Eiben 2010] and [Ek´art et al. 2011].

Keywords: Computational Creativity, Art Exhibitions, History of
Art, Computer Generated Art
Links:

DL

PDF

∗ email:sgc@doc.ic.ac.uk

Introduction

With respect to the graphics techniques underpinning The Painting
Fool, we have implemented some standard non-photorealistic rendering algorithms, along the lines of some of those described in
[Strothotte and Schlechtweg 2002]. These include image segmentation, curve fitting, 3D modelling, colour mapping, and the simulation of natural media including paints, pastels, pencils, watercolours, charcoal sticks, palette knives and brushes, and their usage
for outlining and filling regions on simulated papers and canvases.
A detailed discussion of the baseline graphics features of the software is given in [Colton et al. 2008] and [Colton 2012b].

Finally, to move away from a dependency on photographic inputs, we have worked with various Artificial Intelligence techniques
to enable The Painting Fool to generate scenes from a perceived
imagination. These techniques include concept formation [Colton
2008a], evolutionary approaches [Colton and Torres 2009] [Colton
et al. 2011] [Colton 2012a], constraint solving [Colton 2008c] and
multimedia retrieval [Krzeczkowska et al. 2010] [Cook and Colton
2011] [Colton et al. 2012], and can be harnessed via a layering approach to scene generation, described in [Colton 2010] and [Colton
2012b]. We have recently enabled The Painting Fool to produce
sculptures, animations, 3D galleries and poetry, as described in

Figure 4: An autumnal example from the Four Seasons piece.
Figure 2: An example image from the PresidENTS series, with the
title of the series emphasising the tree people of Tolkein’s Lord of
the Rings book cycle (Ents), depicted using the images of American
presidents – in this case, Barack Obama.

[Colton 2011]. Of particular relevance here, we have also enabled the software to work with the Context Free program (available
at www.contextfreeart.org) which uses Context Free Grammars to
generate abstract artworks and objects such as trees and figures very
efficiently from user-supplied grammars.
As an illustration of the kind of image The Painting Fool can generate, an example from the PresidENTS series of images is given
in figure 2. The size, placement and saturation of the trees, grass
and flowers were decided by generating solutions to a constraint
satisfaction problem abduced by the system from the user dragging
rectangles around [Colton 2008c]. The images of faces were given
by the user, then segmented and abstracted. The trees were generated by the software varying and layering hand-drawn templates
of trees, trunks, leaves and twigs. The scene was rendered using a
simulation of acrylic paints with a heavy tapering style.
With respect to the cultural aspects of the project, we have endeavoured to promote to audiences the idea of software being independently creative. The project has always been driven forward by well
meaning criticisms from people who disagree with using the word
“creative” to describe the software, as described in [Colton 2008b]
and [Colton 2012b]. For this reason, we have been active in gaining feedback from artists, art critics, art historians, art educators and
students, in addition to the general public via talks and demonstrations, the presentation of technical papers, interviews with journalists, and through the maintenance of a website. We have also been
part of five group exhibitions, where we have tried to (a) emphasise
higher level considerations related to the building of autonomously
creative software and (b) place the project in various cultural and
art-historical contexts, through the presentation of artworks and the
demonstration of new pieces being produced live.
In the next section, we describe an exhibition from March 2011
entitled No Photos Harmed / Growing Paths from Seed, by giving
details of our motivations, new software written specifically for the
exhibition, and outcomes of the exhibition. We take the opportunity in section 3 to elaborate on the art-historical contexts within
which we placed the exhibition originally, via a discussion relating
to creative responsibility in the history of art, and the loss of aura
associated with modern developments. We conclude by describing
another previous exhibition whereby a timeline of the development

of The Painting Fool was given in order to highlight how software
progresses and becomes more skilful, appreciative and imaginative
as time passes and the implementation grows. We also describe a
forthcoming exhibition where the theme of autonomy and independence in software will be emphasised. We put this into the context of a series of planned technical and cultural advancements we
have planned on the way to realising the goal of building an autonomously creative artist.

2

Exhibition Details

The No Photos Harmed / Growing Paths from Seed exhibition was
held over a period of two weeks from 19th March to 3rd April 2011.
It was held in a private gallery in Paris and had three viewings: a
vernissage on 19th March, attended by more than 100 people; a
midisage on 24th March, attended by 10 people; and a finisage on
3rd April, attended by around 60 people. The exhibition was presented as a dialogue between a scientist (Computational Creativity
researcher and first author on the paper: Simon Colton) and artist
Eileen Chen (classically trained and currently employed as an architect). In addition to the process panels described below, the exhibition contained four pieces, two from the researcher, who worked
with The Painting Fool to produce them, and two from the artist.
The pieces are portrayed in figure 3.
The first piece from The Painting Fool is entitled The Dancing
Salesman Problem and is 3m by 1m in dimension. It consists of
317 photograph sized printouts (15cm by 10cm), each produced at
a resolution of greater than 500dpi, placed at random angles overlapping each other to cover the whole board. It depicts 17 figures in
various poses, and is rendered with simulated acrylic inks in various
energetic colours, with a fluid painting style that includes strokes
connecting figures which are quite far apart on the canvas. The second piece from The Painting Fool is entitled Four Seasons and is
2m by 1m in diameter. It consists of 120 photograph sized printouts (15cm by 10cm), each produced at a resolution of greater than
600dpi, placed in a grid. Each of these sub-images depicts a countryside scene containing clouds, grass, sky and trees. An example
of one of the sub-images is given in figure 4. There are twelve
columns representing the months of the year, and the weather conditions for each of the months are represented in the changing states
of the trees. Details of how the two pieces were produced are given
in subsection 2.2 below.
The first piece from the artist is entitled Generation of 13 Nudes
and was produced in watercolours, on paper mounted on board. It
is 1.5m by 80cm in dimension. It depicts 13 nude figures, with

Figure 3: Artworks exhibited: top two by The Painting Fool (The Dancing Salesman Problem and Four Seasons), bottom two by the classically
trained artist (Generation of 13 Nudes and LeGrandParis.xml).
the state and pose of each influenced by Anne Carson’s Poem “The
Glass Essay” [Carson 1995]. The second piece from the artist is entitled LeGrandParis.xml and was produced using permanent marker
on transparent film which was then overlaid onto the windows of the
gallery so that some of the buildings in the piece overlapped with
the real buildings in the Paris suburban scene, but were extended in
places in a futuristic style. Moreover, blank areas were left in the
piece, so that – when viewed from the correct position, height and
angle – various real Parisian landmarks such as the Eiffel Tower
were framed by the blank areas as postcards.
In addition to the four pieces, for the viewings, a projector was
set up to show The Painting Fool producing examples from The
Dancing Salesman Problem series. In particular, each simulated stroke is given as a fluid movement, and each stroke leads
onto the next. Videos of the painting process are available at
www.thepaintingfool.com, and a photograph of the demonstration
projected during the exhibition viewings is given in figure 5.

2.1

Dialogues

The main motivation behind the exhibition was to frame The Painting Fool project within various artistic contexts, in order to enable
the audience to form an educated view about the potential for autonomously creative software in the visual arts.
To put The Painting Fool and its exhibition works into an art production context, the dialogue between the artist and the scientist

centred around the ways in which the two art-generation processes
could be compared, and the ways in which the artist could take motivation from the computational processes. To portray this dialogue,
in the two rooms of the exhibition space, a work from the artist
was placed opposite that of the scientist in order to enable visual
comparisons, with Generation of 13 Nudes opposite The Dancing
Salesman Problem and LeGrandParis.xml opposite Four Seasons.
In addition, a set of 11 process panels were produced and displayed,
with one shared process panel and 5 each depicting the production
of The Dancing Salesman Problem and Generation of 13 Nudes.
Each panel has a pictorial representation of an aspect of the production process, and a few sentences of explanation.
The first panel describes how the artist took motivation from viewing XML code, which is at the heart of how The Painting Fool
records aspects of its process (style files for rendering, colour
palettes, etc.) and aspects of its output (for instance, segmentation files as vector graphics). The XML code from a particular
file was eventually used as the basis for the futuristic skyscrapers
in the LeGrandParis.xml piece, which further emphasised the link
between the two sets of work. Moreover, the title of the artist’s
half of the exhibition, namely Growing Paths from Seed was chosen to emphasise how the seed of the XML code influenced the
production of her artworks. The text in the 10 panels following the
shared one was carefully chosen to emphasise as much as possible
the links between the two processes. These include (a) subject material – in both The Dancing Salesman Problem and Generation of
13 Nudes, the pieces are figurative (b) colour palettes which were

2.2

Producing the Software-Generated Pieces

The scene in each of the individual sub-images in the Four Seasons piece was produced via a template into which layers of grass,
sky, clouds and trees were generated and placed. The position
of these elements was decided by moderate variation of the template locations for the sky and clouds; random positioning of the
grasses; and the solving of a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP)
as per [Colton 2008c] for the placement of the trees. In addition
to ensuring that the trees were scaled to be in perspective, the CSP
solution specified the overall saturation level of each tree, so that
smaller (further away) ones were less saturated, giving a look of
distance. The individual trees and clouds were generated with a
context-free design grammar (both of which were downloaded from
www.contextfreeart.org). The grasses were from a template which
was varied, and the segmentations of the scene layers were rendered
with simulated pencil and pastel strokes. For each of the 12 months,
20 images were produced, and 10 were chosen for the final piece.
Figure 5: Photograph of the projected live demonstration.

shared between the two pieces, and (c) external motivations, namely
the Travelling Salesman Problem from Computer Science, and the
poem by Anne Carson. A photograph of the process panels and the
texts from them are given in the appendix.
The title of the scientist’s half of the exhibition, namely No Photos
Harmed was chosen to emphasise the relationship of The Painting
Fool with other software-based art production methods. In particular, there are two popular conceptions of what generative art can
produce: firstly, starting from photographs, pastiches in the style
of various artists (and more novel styles) can be produced using
software such as Adobe Photoshop; secondly, via methods such
as fractal calculations and evolutionary art, abstract and beautiful
pieces can be produced. By stating that “No Photos Were Harmed
in the Production of These Pieces” (the full title), we emphasised
that, while they are clearly representational (figurative pieces and
landscapes), digital photographs were not used as base art materials. This highlights a third type of generative art, which is representational but not based on photographs. This point was further
ironically emphasised with the production method for both of The
Painting Fool’s pieces, i.e., where photograph-sized printouts, normally associated with photography, were used as the physical basis
of the two pieces.
To put The Painting Fool and its works into an art-historical context,
the dialogue centred around the ways in which creative responsibility is willfully handed over in the arts. This is clear in the case of
The Painting Fool, where the software is asked to produce entire
pieces, and the modus operandus is to never tamper with the final
product, i.e., if the pieces are not ready for some reason, then we
either write better generative or better analytical software and run
the software again, rather than fixing the pieces by hand. To appeal
to this context, the artist chose the medium of watercolour for Generation of 13 Nudes, which can lead to loss of fine-grained control,
and she highlighted the handing over of creative responsibility in
the process panels. In addition, with the LeGrandParis.xml piece,
the artist was forced to cede some creative responsibility to the architects and town planners of the city of Paris, as this formed the
basis for the content in the piece.
In later discussions with an art historian (second author of this paper), the art-historical context of handing over creative responsibility has been expanded in section 3, and this is extended by framing
The Painting Fool in the context of loss of aura in the age of mechanical reproduction and the age of computational processes.

The figures in The Dancing Salesman Problem piece were generated from two context-free design grammars (again downloaded
from www.contextfreeart.org) which can generate male and female
mannequins. The piece takes its name from the novel painting style
we implemented that enables the software to essentially paint an
entire scene in one stroke. While the stroke changes colours and
peters out and back in again, each stroke leads onto the next. To enable this, before the rendering of a segmentation (the basis of how
The Painting Fool produces its pieces), the segmentation is transformed into a series of lines with one starting where the previous
one ends. Each line constitutes the boundary of a segment, and is
extended in order to meet the next line at the half-way point between the two. To cover all of the segments in the segmentation,
we posed this as an instance of the Travelling Salesman Problem,
whereby a salesman has to drive to each of a set of towns, without
returning to any of them. By mapping each segment onto a town,
and implementing the simplest solving method for these problems
(which is to travel to the nearest town that hasn’t been visited before), we implemented the new painting style. We were intending
to write more sophisticated solving methods, but we found that the
corrections where the next unvisited town is a long way off leads
to long paint strokes which add vibrancy and unpredictability to
paintings, hence we have so far kept the simple solving method.
We chose to produce The Painting Fool’s pieces to a high professional standard in terms of image resolution. In particular,
The Dancing Salesman Problem image was produced at 80,000
by 12,000 pixels, hence it consists of nearly a billion pixels (albeit many of which are black). This size was calculated so that
when printed onto a 3m by 1m canvas, the print resolution would
be over 500dpi, which means that even at millimetre distances, it
is not possible to see pixelation. When printed onto glossy photographic paper at this resolution, the bright colours in the piece are
particularly vibrant. To cope with the memory issues associated
with producing a piece of this size, we implemented standard tiling
methods, whereby the software only works on a single tile at any
time, keeping the tiles on the hard drive, and saving/loading them
when required. With 16Gb of memory available, we found that only
10 tiles were required for the billion-pixel images. To cope with efficiency issues, we also implemented a multi-threading approach
whereby sequences of non-overlapping paint strokes are metered
out to individual cores on a multi-core machine for increased speed.
However, the tiling method interfered with this, as non-overlapping
paint strokes were often on different tiles. In future, we will implement more sophisticated parallel-processing routines.
As we wanted curatorial control over the piece eventually printed
and exhibited, we chose to produce around 100 sketches (at 8,000
by 1,200 pixels), rather than multiple billion-pixel images, because

these take around 17 hours to produce on a 24-core Mac OS X machine with 16Gb of RAM. In order to generate the full size image
from the chosen sketch (which is portrayed in figure 1), we implemented the ability for The Painting Fool to record the sketch paintings as vector graphics, i.e., sets of paint strokes in XML code, and
for it to re-paint the piece with larger brush sizes. The brush sizes
for the sketches were in the order of 50 pixels wide, while the final
brush sizes were in the order of 500 pixels wide.
To produce the final piece for the exhibition, we implemented a
routine which was able to take the tiled image and extract a set of
overlapping, randomly rotated sub-images which would print onto
borderless 10cm by 15cm photographic papers. This was done in
such as way that the overlap was sufficient to avoid holes showing
through. Starting from the centre and working outwards, we had
a number of abortive attempts to produce the piece, as it was very
difficult to line up the sub-image printouts. To combat this, we
experimented with getting the software to print various guidelines
onto the non-showing parts of the printouts, until we found one we
could work with. Examples of the photo-sized printouts with the
guidelines on, and a depiction of the construction process are given
in figure 6. The printouts were glued onto four pieces of 1m by
80cm black foam board, taking around 24 hours of effort.

2.3

Feedback

The viewings for this exhibition were carried out in the long tradition of evenings where no surveys are undertaken, and only informal feedback is sought. Given the profession of the (amateur)
artist as an architect, many of the invited guests were young architects. The use of generative techniques in architecture is very
much a hot-topic at the moment, and so these audience members
were particularly intrigued by the No Photos Harmed theme and
the potential for context-free grammars in generative art applications. They were particularly pleased to hear that the usage of such
grammars in graphics was originally motivated by architecture applications [Stiny and Gips 1971].
In general, it was interesting to note the general acceptance of the
value of generative art. In particular, we found that the demonstration of The Painting Fool in action (see figure 5) was very much appreciated by many audience members, who used words like “mesmerising” to convey how they felt about seeing pieces produced
live. This led to a number of people asking for quantification of
the amount of creativity exhibited by The Painting Fool in the production of these pieces. After some thought, wherein the level of
creative input, the quantity of decisions made, and the level of surprise produced by the software were weighed, a split of 90/10% of
creative responsibility in favour of the researcher using the software
was chosen. While somewhat arbitrary, this was accepted largely
without argument, which we found interesting, as it may justify the
usage of such estimates in future. As discussed in section 4 below,
we have already begun to increase the 10% figure with new implementations and applications, and we plan to continue doing this.
There were many positive comments about the level of professionalism in the exhibition in general, and about the high-resolution images in particular. Some people were particularly impressed by the
simulation of rendered paints, and were initially confused that they
weren’t actual paint strokes – until encouraged to have a closer look.
Other people were impressed by the software choosing the colour,
position and nature of each paint stroke, i.e., they could imagine
themselves using Adobe Illustrator to produce something similar,
but couldn’t imagine a program doing this automatically. It was
somewhat disappointing not to get much negative feedback about
why it is (or will always be) inappropriate to talk about software
being creative – gaining such feedback is a default aim of such outreach projects, as this fuels further research. This was possibly due

Figure 6: Top: two examples of photograph-sized printouts at
500dpi for The Dancing Salesman Problem piece. Bottom: snapshot during the construction of the piece.
to the politeness of the audience members, and possibly because we
had done our job well, and enabled people to take an informed view
of the potential of software in the arts.
The Dancing Salesman Problem and Four Seasons pieces have had
an additional life after the exhibition. In particular, the former appeared in a double-page spread of an article on Computational Creativity in The New Scientist popular science magazine [de Lange
2012], with parts of the latter also portrayed. This led to a follow up
piece in the online io9 magazine, with amusing reader comments,
largely relating to the Terminator series of films [Wilkins 2012].
The Observer newspaper also featured The Painting Fool and The
Dancing Salesman Problem in two pieces on Artificial Intelligence
[Kappala-Ramsamy 2012] [du Sautoy 2012]. Moreover, The Dancing Salesman Problem piece was featured in a BBC Horizon documentary on Artificial Intelligence, which marked the 100th anniversary of Alan Turing’s birth. During the filming of the documentary,
images produced by The Painting Fool were shown to artists and
gallery owners in Paris, who were asked for their responses before
and after being told that the pieces were generated by software. In
an interesting an honest response from one gallery owner, before
being told that The Dancing Salesman Problem was produced by
software, he said that he was very interested in the piece, and could
imagine selling it. After being told about The Painting Fool, the
gallery owner said that he liked the piece even more, but said that
he would have a more difficult time selling it to his customers due to
the nature of its production. The BBC documentary led to sales of
prints of The Dancing Salesman Problem to members of the public,
which marks an important milestone in The Painting Fool project.

3

Contexts in the History of Art

In addition to raising awareness of the potential of software to produce pieces of real cultural value, exhibitions are very useful milestones where one can take stock and consider the project in various
contexts. As mentioned above, one of our motivations with the No
Photos Harmed / Growing Paths from Seed exhibition was to enable a dialogue between a Computational Creativity researcher and
a classically trained artist. One of the outcomes was the emergence
of the theme of handing over creative responsibility, in both computer generated art and in traditional art practice, which we expand
upon here, followed by a discussion of loss of aura in the arts.

3.1

Creative Responsibility

There are various popular conceptions of painters at work, for instance the starving artist working in a garret, producing great art to
sell in order to pay the rent. Another popular image which requires
some scrutiny is the artist as the entire creative force behind the production of their art. This specific idea of artist has only existed since
the 19th century, having evolved since Renaissance times, when
artists began framing their work in more intellectual contexts, in
order to improve their position in society. In many cases, this artistcentric impression is true: the artist conceives an overall idea for
a painting, then assembles the art materials, places every stroke on
the canvas, possibly gives the piece a title and might also write essays about the piece. It is clear to see why this conception of the
artist is popular, as it emphasises the creativity of an individual, and
as a society, we very much value creative people.
However, throughout the history of art, artists have often ceded
some of the responsibility behind art production to other people.
This may have been against their will, with a client imposing unwelcome constraints on a commission, or it may have been for practical
considerations of time and/or effort and/or practicality, whereby an
artist has worked with apprentices in an atelier, or hired a craftsman
to undertake artistic processes under their guidance. Alternatively,
it might have been for educational purposes, whereby an apprentice
is given a task to undertake on a larger painting, or even to produce
an entire painting from a drawing made by the master. As an extreme example, according to [Vasari 1998], in the production of The
Baptism of Christ (1472-1475), the master Andrea di Cione, known
as Verrochio, collaborated with his apprentice, Leonardo da Vinci
– with the latter being responsible for painting two angels in the
scene. Vasari reports that Da Vinci’s work was judged by Verrochio
as so superior to his own, that Verrochio chose never to paint again.
More contemporary examples include Damien Hirst and Takashi
Murakami, who employ workshops of artists, with Hirst reputed to
have a “150-strong team of assistants” in [O’Hagan 2012].
In addition, some artists willfully cede some creative responsibility
to another person, people in a collective, a technique, a medium,
and in modern times: a computer program. By ‘creative responsibility’, we use a fairly inclusive definition to mean that aspects of
a whole artwork are produced by an agent which is not completely
controlled by the artist. This is done in such a way that the resulting work may surprise, educate and inform the artist, either at the
level of an individual artwork, the level of a style or an aesthetic
consideration, or at a conceptual level. The agent in question here
could naturally be another person or group of people. This could be
an apprentice or workshop employee, as above, where the feedback
is expected to be at least a little surprising, i.e., where the subordinate is given more creative license. Alternatively, the collaboration could be more egalitarian and direct, and an important part of
the creative process. As a famous example of this, Jean Tinguely
and Niki de Saint Phalle worked together on the Stravinksy Fountain (1983) at the Centre Pompidou in Paris. Here, the roles of the

artists were largely separate – with Tinguely working mostly on
the kinetic mechanisms and de Saint Phalle working mostly on the
colourful exterior of the fountain. A more recent and immediate example where artists have simultaneously worked on the same canvas, is the work of naturalist painting duo Williams and Winstanley,
who paint hand over hand [Williams and Winstanley 2003].
Mutual creative influence can also be seen with artists working in
larger collectives, whereby ideas and techniques are swapped and
extended, such as in the European CoBrA collective (1948 - 1951),
[Dempsey 2010] (page 193) in which some paintings are attributed
joint authorship, such as the work Je l`eve, tu l`eves, nous rˆevons
(1948) by Christian Dotremont and Asger Jorn. In particular, the
series of paintings known as Peintures-Mot, where words and images were combined, were all produced in collaboration. As the
influence raises to the level of that of a movement, whereby artists
work within a genre, or to a certain set of ideals, such as with the
Futurists, Cubists or Impressionists, etc., artists exchange ideas and
techniques. However, it is difficult here to say that one artist is
ceding creative responsibility to others.
When the agent to whom an artist cedes creative responsibility is
another person, there is the implicit assumption that a conscious,
salient and communicable thought process has gone into the execution of that responsibility. In contrast, however, the agent may
be as simple as a technique within which a medium or a tool is
not completely controlled by the artist. For instance, certain media
allow the artist less fine-grained control over the way pigments are
placed on a canvas or paper, e.g., with watercolours, the artist has to
literally go with the flow sometimes. Jackson Pollock exemplified
how to productively use levels of randomness with art materials,
as the artist ceded creative responsibility (to a small extent) to the
effects of gravity on paint dripping from a brush or can. Naturally,
Pollock explicitly developed this method, thus he exerted high level
control while handing over low level control. As another example,
the British twentieth century artist Francis Bacon was well known
for making wild stabbing movements at the canvas, with the lack of
control often leading to unexpected results which could be opportunistically turned to his advantage. Farson indicates that:
With the confidence he gained, his approach became
even more dangerous, and as a result, more vibrant. In
the fifties he often talked about working as close to instinct or as close to his nervous system as he could.
He was fascinated to see how the paint fell, turning
this to his advantage... [Bacon said that] ‘...out of this
chaos comes the possibility of making an image I hadn’t
thought of before’. [Farson 1994] (page 83)
Seen in the context of handing over creative responsibility, it is clear
that at the time of the No Photos Harmed / Growing Paths from
Seed exhibition, The Painting Fool was an agent that an artist could
willfully cede creative responsibility to, but which exists between
the extremes of mere tool, medium or technique from which semirandom stylistic feedback can be gained (Bacon’s stabbing movements, Pollock’s dripping method) and a sentient creative collaborator (Hirst’s workshop ateliers), where intelligent choices are made
in order to handle the responsibility given in the art production
process. Working with The Painting Fool to create The Dancing
Salesman Problem and the Four Seasons pieces involved expressing ideas to the software, waiting for it to construct a painting and
then either producing more of the same prototype – to see if a particularly good exemplar of the genre could be produced – or moving
on to a new prototype. For instance, with The Dancing Salesman
Problem piece, many examples of around a dozen prototypes were
produced before the final artwork was selected for the exhibition
and then re-rendered to be of sufficient resolution quality. Two examples of rejected prototypes are given in figure 7.

Figure 7: Examples of prototypes preceding the final production of
The Dancing Salesman Problem piece.

Given this collaborative working approach, we see that particular
styles and techniques and the simulation of the usage of particular
art materials can be experimented with. However, it is difficult to
describe The Painting Fool as taking on creative responsibility only
in the same way as a random stab of a paint brush might, as the
software constructs, places and simulates the painting of figures.
In many respects, the software acts like a subordinate artist when
working collaboratively. However, the version of The Painting Fool
used in the exhibition had no critical ability and didn’t appeal to any
aesthetic considerations, i.e., it was merely generative. It therefore
is not correct to elevate the software to the level of human workshop
employee or similar, and the software fits naturally between the
extreme of tool and collaborator.
Of course, other pieces of art enabling software, such as Adobe’s
Illustrator package, also fit naturally between these extremes. However, The Painting Fool’s generative abilities distinguish it from the
level of tools such as Illustrator, as the software is able to create
complex scenes before rendering them, with the scenes often constructed using AI techniques such as context free grammars and
constraint solving (in the case of the Four Seasons series of pictures). The Painting Fool is more fairly compared to Harold Cohen’s AARON software which has been creating scenes from a
perceived imagination for decades [McCorduck 1991]. However,
The Painting Fool is distinguished from AARON by its flexibility: AARON produces scenes only of one particular nature (rooms
with people and pot plants) and renders them in only one particular style (which is similar to Cohen’s own style). In contrast, The
Painting Fool can be trained by any artist to generate scenes of a
much more varied nature, and to render them in hundreds of different styles. Although not used in the exhibition discussed here,
The Painting Fool also has some critical abilities to assess aesthetic
qualities of scene templates and rendered scenes, as discussed in
[Colton 2012a]. Such abilities were never intended to be part of the
AARON project, as Cohen prefers to retain the creative responsibility of selecting the pieces produced by his software.

3.2

Loss of Aura

As discussed in the next section, our aim is to push The Painting
Fool along the spectrum from mere tool towards becoming a creative collaborator and then to go beyond this in the same way that
Da Vinci (eventually) did from Verrochio – although maybe not
with the same huge consequences for the history of art! This aim
can be seen in another context related to the aura surrounding an
artwork. As pointed out in [Monro 2011], Walter Benjamin highlights the loss of the aura of uniqueness surrounding an artwork
in the age of mechanical reproduction [Benjamin 2008]. Monro
goes further than this, to point out that in the age of software as
tool, medium and collaborator, the aura of authorship surround-

ing an artwork can be lost, “brought about by handing over part of
the creative work to a computer program”. He concludes by pointing out that “if a work is presented in the context of high art as
the work of a computer program, the absence of the aura of human creation can be profoundly disturbing”. Through our exhibitions and other outreach activities, we can verify that the notion of
a software program which will one day be taken seriously as an independent and creative artist can indeed be disturbing. However,
we believe that the loss of the aura of human authorship can be
supplanted with the formation of an aura around particular computer programs such as The Painting Fool. To emphasise this, we
use simple means, such as maintaining a web page in The Painting
Fool’s voice (www.thepaintingfool.com), and getting it to sign its
pieces, and more sophisticated means such as enabling it to produce stories to frame the production and aesthetic value of each
piece it produces, and getting it to exhibit aspects of a rudimentary
personality, as discussed in [Pease et al. 2012].
This nurturing of an aura is in line somewhat with the so-called Istanbul Manifesto, as described in [Moura et al. 2011], which starts
with the idea “To make art that makes art”, goes on to describe how
new artificial organisms are reproducing, evolving and producing
art, then ends with the provocative statement that “The great artist
of tomorrow will not be human”. We do not subscribe to the exclusive view that machines rather than people will be the great artists
of tomorrow. It is our hope in the medium term that software such
as The Painting Fool will be able to act as genuine creative collaborators with artists, followed later by the software gaining so much
creative responsibility that it seems sensible to call it an artist in its
own right. We are far more realistic about the timescales involved
in producing computer artists than the authors of the Istanbul Manifesto, and we have a much more detailed roadmap (some of which
is described below) for achieving this. We argue that this will not
diminish the value of human art, but rather enhance its value, as
people will continue to cherish connections with other people, and
will begin to appreciate this more, as they have a choice between
meaningful and inspiring art produced by people and meaningful
and inspiring art produced by computer.

4

Conclusions and Further Work

The No Photos Harmed / Growing Paths from Seed exhibition enabled us to fine-tune the ways in which computer art can be mediated in the art world, in addition to giving us very useful feedback
on the impact that The Painting Fool could have in the art world,
and that of the field of Computational Creativity in general. It drove
technical development of the software, and enabled us to present it
and the artworks it produces both in an art production context by
comparing it to the processes undertaken by a traditional artist, and
in an art-historical context, by looking at the levels in which artists
traditionally hand over creative responsibilities to other agents.
Presenting The Painting Fool’s work at exhibitions is a very important part of the project. In September 2011, as part of a one
night group exhibition at La Maison Rouge in Paris, celebrating
the 15th anniversary of the Sony Computer Science Laboratory, we
presented a retrospective of ten years of development of the software. In particular, we added new code to enable it to place its
own work in a timeline, and then carried out its layout instructions
in the actual gallery. The generated timeline and its physical realisation in the exhibition are given in figures 8 and 9. The timeline
is split into three periods, described as the skill period, where the
software largely worked with digital photographs to produce its art;
the appreciation period, where the software appealed to emotion
detection and other machine vision methods to drive its art production; and the imagination period, where images were produced by
inventing, populating and rendering novel scenes. More details of

Figure 8: Schematic of the timeline generated by The Painting Fool for the Growth exhibition in La Maison Rouge, Paris, in September 2011.
The red, green and blue areas correspond to the Skill, Appreciation and Imagination periods in the development of the software.

Figure 10: Input to and output from the Kinect software preparing
images of people for rendering in pieces for the “You Can’t Know
my Mind” planned exhibition. 3D extractions of the whole body,
head, torso and a leg are portrayed.

Figure 9: Physical realisation of the timeline for the Growth exhibition in La Maison Rouge, September 2011.

these periods are given in [Colton 2012b]. The last pieces in the
timeline, namely 3D galleries, sculptures and animations were presented as a video on a loop. We used this exhibition to highlight
the progression of the software, with its early images in sharp contrast – in terms of visual impact and sophistication – with its later
images. Our aim was to relate the software to art historic contexts
such as progression and periods in an artist’s development of skills,
temperament, techniques, subject matter and conceptualisations.

2010] and [Cook and Colton 2011]). The software will indicate the
reasons for its obstinacy, which might include showing the person
a particularly depressing Guardian article. We hope that this will
genuinely infuriate at least a few people at least some of the time,
and will serve to highlight the na¨ıve point of view that software is
really just an avatar for its programmer.

The next exhibition with output from The Painting Fool will be
called You Can’t Know My Mind and will challenge people’s perception that software is simply carrying out commands issued by a
programmer. Part of the exhibition will involve live generation of
pieces from The Dancing Salesman Problem series, but will be interactive. That is, people will be encouraged to pull a full-body pose
similar to the figures in the pieces (and this will include jumping in
the air). Then, a version of The Dancing Salesman Problem will be
produced where the person will feature as one of the dancers. This
will be enabled with a new module for The Painting Fool that uses a
Kinect 3D video sensor (normally used for gaming with the XBox)
to pick up where the person is in the scene, and the frame in the
recorded video to use in the painting, e.g., the apex of the jump, or
where they have held the pose. In addition, the software can extract
which pixels in the frame constitute their head, arms, legs or torso,
which will help in the faithful inclusion of the person of the final
piece. An example extraction is given in figure 10.

In summary, and to recap: with The Painting Fool project, we aim
for the software to be taken seriously one day as an independent and
creative artist in its own right. Our cultural road map will be driven
by generative projects with the software and the exhibition of its
output as planned above. The technical road map involves (a) combining the software with other programs from graphics, machine
vision and AI in general and Computational Creativity research in
particular, to multiply its creative intelligence – in particular, we
plan to combine it with concept formation systems such that described in [Colton 2002], so that concept formation is at the heart
of its creative processing (b) enabling it to frame its work by producing stories – which may contain elements of fiction – about the
work it produces and the underlying processes [Pease et al. 2012]
(c) implementing aspects of a personality which can be affected
by world events and used to drive the production of more thoughtprovoking and surprising pictures (d) continuing to enable it to create in more domains, which currently include visual arts, sculpture,
curatorial gallery design and poetry (e) enabling it to appreciate the
work of other artists, to reference their work, to understand artistic
movements and find a conceptual and visual niche for itself. All this
will be done with reference to the guidelines for developing creative
software in [Colton 2009], e.g., handing over creative responsibility wherever possible, and giving the software abilities which could
reasonably be deemed skillful, appreciative and imaginative.

However, there will be a twist to the tale. Occasionally, the software
will pointedly refuse to paint the picture, and may choose to paint
nothing at all, or to paint something else, or even to pen a poem, as
per [Colton et al. 2012]. Moreover, this refusal will not be based on
any random number generator, but rather on physical characteristics
of the person’s clothing and/or their pose, driven by the software
simulating a mood and an aesthetic for the day (based on it reading
articles from the Guardian newspaper, as per [Krzeczkowska et al.

An important idea arising from the No Photos Harmed / Growing
Paths from Seed exhibition described here is that people are interested in a quantification of the ratio of creativity exhibited by the
software and the person in collaborative projects. The rather arbitrary figure we gave – of 10% creative responsibility exerted by the
software – is a good reference point, and with the projects described
above, we hope to engineer, apply and present The Painting Fool in
such a way as to bring this to 100% in the future.

Acknowledgements
We would like to extend huge gratitude to Eileen Chen, the artist
whose enthusiasm, ideas and art drove the exhibition described
here. Thanks also to John Charnley for supplying the images in figure 10. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful and helpful comments, which improved the final draft
of this paper. Finally, we would like to thank the developers of
the ContextFree software (www.contextfreeart.org) and the people
who developed grammars for it, as we have built on their hard work.
This work has been supported by EPSRC grant EP/J004049/1.

References
B ENJAMIN , W. 2008. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction. Penguin.
C ARDOSO , A., V EALE , T., AND W IGGINS , G. 2009. Converging
on the divergent: The history (and future) of the international
joint workshops in computational creativity. AI Magazine 30(3).
C ARSON , A. 1995. Glass, Irony and God. New Directions Publishing Corporation.
C OLTON , S., AND T ORRES , P. 2009. Evolving approximate image
filters. In Proceedings of the EvoMusArt Workshop.
C OLTON , S., VALSTAR , M., AND PANTIC , M. 2008. Emotionally aware automated portrait painting. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts.

C OLTON , S. 2012. The Painting Fool: Stories from building an automated painter. In Computers and Creativity, Springer-Verlag,
J. McCormack and M. d’Inverno, Eds.
C OOK , M., AND C OLTON , S. 2011. Automated collage generation - with more intent. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Computational Creativity.
L ANGE , C. 2012. Creative sparks. New Scientist, 14th January,
42–45.

DE

D EMPSEY, A. 2010. Styles, Schools and Movements. Thames and
Hudson.
H EIJER , E., AND E IBEN , A. 2010. Comparing aesthetic
measures for evolutionary art. In Proceedings of the EvoMusArt
workshop.

DEN

S AUTOY, M. 2012. Ai robot: Evolution of the machines that
learn for themselves. Observer (New Review), 1st April, 24–25.

DU

´ , A., S HARMA , D., AND C HALAKOV, S. 2011. Modelling
E K ART
human preference in evolutionary art. In Proceedings of the EvoMusArt workshop.
FARSON , D. 1994. The Gilded Gutter Life of Francis Bacon. Vintage Books.
K APPALA -R AMSAMY, G. 2012. Robot painter draws on abstract
thoughts. Observer (New Review), 1st April, 25.
K RZECZKOWSKA , A., E L -H AGE , J., C OLTON , S., AND C LARK ,
S. 2010. Automated collage generation - with intent. In Proc. of
the 1st International Conference on Computational Creativity.

´
´
C OLTON , S., L OPEZ
DE M ANTARAS
, R., AND S TOCK , O. 2009.
Computational creativity: Coming of age. AI Magazine 30(3).

M C C ORDUCK , P. 1991. AARON’s Code: Meta-Art, Artificial Intelligence, and the Work of Harold Cohen. Freeman & Co.

C OLTON , S., C OOK , M., AND R AAD , A. 2011. Ludic considerations of tablet-based evo-art. In Proceedings of the EvoMusArt
workshop.

M ONRO , G.
2011.
The image in the age of computer agency.
Unpublished preprint, available from
www.gommog.com/archive/Impact7 FinalDraft.pdf.

C OLTON , S., G OODWIN , J., AND V EALE , T. 2012. Full-FACE
poetry generation. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Computational Creativity.

M OURA , L., G ARCIA P EREIRA , H., AND R INALDO , K. 2011.
The Istanbul manifesto. Unpublished manifesto, available from
www.leonelmoura.com/manifesto istanbul.html.

C OLTON , S. 2002. Automated Theory Formation in Pure Mathematics. Springer-Verlag.

O’H AGAN , S. 2012. Damien Hirst: ‘I still believe art is more
powerful than money.’ Observer (Culture) 11th March.

C OLTON , S. 2008. Automatic invention of fitness functions, with
application to scene generation. In Proceedings of the EvoMusArt Workshop.

P EASE , A., C HARNLEY, J., AND C OLTON , S. 2012. On the notion
of framing in computational creativity. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Computational Creativity.

C OLTON , S. 2008. Creativity versus the perception of creativity
in computational systems. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring
Symposium on Creative Systems.

S HUGRINA , M., B ETKE , M., AND C OLLOMOSSE , J. 2006. Empathic painting: interactive stylization through observed emotional state. In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium
on Non-photorealistic Animation and Rendering.

C OLTON , S. 2008. Experiments in constraint-based automated
scene generation. In Proceedings of the 5th International Joint
Workshop on Computational Creativity.
C OLTON , S. 2009. Seven catchy phrases for computational creativity research. In Proceedings of the Dagstuhl Seminar: Computational Creativity: An Interdisciplinary Approach.
C OLTON , S. 2010. The Painting Fool teaching interface. In
Show and Tell Proceedings of the 1st International Conference
on Computational Creativity.
C OLTON , S. 2011. The Painting Fool in new dimensions. In
Show and Tell Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Computational Creativity.
C OLTON , S. 2012. Evolving a library of artistic scene descriptors.
In Proceedings of the EvoMusArt conference.

S TINY, G., AND G IPS , J. 1971. Shape grammars and the generative
specification of painting and sculpture. In Proceedings of the
IFIP World Computer Congress.
S TROTHOTTE , T., AND S CHLECHTWEG , S.
2002.
Photorealistic Computer Graphics. Morgan Kaufmann.

Non-

VASARI , G. 1998. The Lives of the Artists. OUP.
W ILKINS , A. 2012. A computer program “painted” this artwork from its own imagination. io9, 25th January, available at http://io9.com/5879423/a-computer-program-paintedthis-artwork-from-its-own-imagination.
W ILLIAMS , O., AND W INSTANLEY, S. 2003. Arctic, Desert,
Ocean, Jungle. Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

Figure 11: Process panels comparing the production of The Dancing Salesman Problem piece (top row) and the Generation of 13 Nudes
piece (bottom row), starting from the same genesis: XML code.

Appendix - Process Panel Texts
The process panels as presented at the exhibition are given in figure
11. In the pairs of texts below, the first is from the scientist (top row
in figure 11) and the second is from the artist (bottom row).
1. Seed File - Definition of Creative Parameters
Variables and major categories are assigned. For these works, variables include subject/object, number and size of frames, colour
palette, and medium/stylistic technique.
2a. Subject/Object
As a piece constructed of individual elements, the chosen object is
the nude figure. A series of images are generated from context-free
design grammars with random aspects ensuring variation.
2b. Subject/Object
As a piece constructed of individual elements, the chosen object is
the nude figure. A series of images are chosen from a library of
sketches that are then used as a base for the subjects in the piece.
3a. Frames
A template is used to create a series of frames into which a figure is
inscribed and scaled to fit the width of the box, with larger figures
brought to the foreground. The result is variation in the size of the
figures and an illusion of depth of field.
3b. Frames
Art papers in a selection of standard sizes are used in collage to
create a series of frames of varying sizes into which each chosen
figure is inscribed. The result is variation in the size of figures and
an illusion of depth of field.

4a. Scientific Imagery
One of the main processes in producing the artwork involves turning paint regions into a single continuous line. Doing this amounts
to solving – via heuristic means – an instance of the Travelling
Salesman Problem, which is classic Computer Science.
4b. Poetic Imagery
An additional decision was made in the process to imbue each of the
figures with characteristics from the 13 nudes described in Anne
Carson’s Poem “The Glass Essay”. The highly graphical text is
used to develop each figure as a distinct character.
5a. Colour Palette
A standard colour palette from “The Colour Index” is chosen to randomly map shapes to, and used as a guide in mixing paint colours
for the final image. The shapes are turned into a single line covering
the whole picture space.
5b. Colour Palette
A standard colour palette from “The Colour Index” is chosen as a
constraint, and used as a guide in mixing paint colours for the final
image.
6a. Artistic Medium/Stylistic Technique
Acrylic paint, a traditional artistic medium, is chosen to simulate
in the final rendering process, for its vibrant and dynamic nature.
Random aspects are introduced to add to the hand-produced look
and feel.
6b. Artistic Medium/Stylistic Technique
Watercolour paint, a traditional artistic medium, is chosen for its
ability to create random, and sometimes unexpected visual results,
depending on the paint to water distribution. In this way, artistic
control is handed over to the medium.

