Editorial

Computational Creativity:
Coming of Age
Simon Colton, Ramon López de Mántaras,
and Oliviero Stock

! This editorial provides an introduction to
current AI research on computationally created
artifacts as well as to the papers and topics covered by this special issue on computational creativity.

A

t its heart, computational creativity is the study of building software that exhibits behavior that would be deemed creative in humans. Such creative software can be used for
autonomous creative tasks, such as inventing mathematical theories, writing poems, painting pictures, and composing music.
However, computational creativity studies also enable us to
understand human creativity and to produce programs for creative people to use, where the software acts as a creative collaborator rather than a mere tool. Historically, it’s been difficult for
society to come to terms with machines that purport to be intelligent and even more difficult to admit that they might be creative. For instance, in 1934, some professors at the University of
Manchester in the United Kingdom built meccano models that
were able to solve some mathematical equations. Groundbreaking for its time, this project was written up in a piece in Meccano Magazine. The article was titled “Are Thinking Machines Possible” and was very upbeat, but surprisingly ends by stating that
“Truly creative thinking of course will always remain beyond
the power of any machine.”
Surely, though, this attitude has changed in light of the amazing advances in hardware and software technology that followed those meccano models? Sadly, no. Not much. Even within computer science, people are still skeptical about the creative
potential of software. For instance, in Non-Photorealistic Rendering, a graphics textbook published in 2000, authors Thomas
Stothotte and Stefan Schlechtweg boldly state that “simulating
artistic techniques means also simulating human thinking and
reasoning, especially creative thinking. This is impossible to do
using algorithms or information processing systems.” We could-

Copyright © 2009, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. All rights reserved. ISSN 0738-4602

FALL 2009 11

Editorial

n’t disagree more. As is hopefully evident from the
articles in this volume, creativity is not some mystical gift that is beyond scientific study but rather
something that can be investigated, simulated, and
harnessed for the good of society. And while society might still be catching up, computational creativity as a discipline has come of age. This maturity is evident in the amount of activity related to
computational creativity in recent years; in the
sophistication of the creative software we are
building; in the cultural value of the artifacts being
produced by our software; and most importantly,
in the consensus we are finding on general issues
of computer creativity.
In the early days of AI research, many of the
projects had grand goals: to build software able to
compose sonatas, invent mathematical theories,
and so on. In those days, the artifact-generation
paradigm reigned supreme: the emphasis was on
software that simulated entire reasoning and
invention processes in order to build artifacts of
real value. However, as further studies highlighted
how difficult it is to implement artificially intelligent programs, AI researchers adopted the problem-solving paradigm. Here, an intelligent task is
immediately broken down into manageable subparts and characterized as either a machine-learning problem, a planning problem, a theorem-proving problem, and so on. This kind of shoehorning
enabled AI research to advance and—importantly—to demonstrate advances in concrete terms.
Research in these subareas flourished, but it fragmented AI research: how many people regularly go
to both machine-learning and theorem-proving
conferences, for instance?
While problem solving certainly requires creativity, the majority of computational creativity
researchers are more interested in the artifact-generation paradigm and are actively engaged in putting the pieces back together again. In this way, by
combining AI systems, we are able to “climb the
metamountain.” By this, we mean that individual
techniques from AI and other areas of computing
such as graphics are sufficiently powerful enough
for us to enable software to take on tasks at increasing metalevels. For instance, automated painting
has largely been associated with graphics research,
where researchers have produced great tools that
simulate some physical aspects of the painting
process but not the cognitive aspects. Computational creativity researchers take their techniques,
and ones from machine vision and other areas of
AI, and simulate the way in which artists use these
tools, for instance, by implementing scene construction methods. After this, we can look at the
motivation for scene construction to express certain concepts and ideas, and so on. In this fashion,
more of the cognitive aspects of creative processes
are simulated, and artifacts of higher cultural val-

12

AI MAGAZINE

ue are produced by increasingly autonomous creative systems.
In the article by Amilcar Cardoso, Geraint Wiggins, and Tony Veale (“Converging on the Divergent: The History [and Future] of the International Joint Workshops in Computational Cre ativity”), more of the issues about which the community is coming to consensus are explored. This
is done within the context of a survey of 10 years
of computational creativity workshops. The
authors start by separating the word creativity
from the concept of “creativity,” and put both of
these into historical context. In addition to historical case studies, they survey, compare, and
contrast the philosophical and practical contributions made by key players in the field over the
years and describe some logistics, such as the rise
of the “show and tell” sessions at the annual
meetings. They end by highlighting the prospects
for research in this area and arguing that the field
of computational creativity is very close to having firm enough foundations for rigorous scientific investigations in the future. This will be tested in coming years, as the series of computational
creativity workshops evolves into the first computational creativity conference, to be held in Lisbon in January 2010.1
Margaret Boden has been a key player in the
field of computational creativity for a long time,
having authored a number of influential books
and papers. Her scholarly article here (“Computer
Models of Creativity”) examines some of the
thorny philosophical issues surrounding human
and computer creativity. Unlike some authors
working on creativity issues, she starts from the
premise that creativity isn’t a magical process that
should be held in awe. From this starting point,
Boden goes on to describe various ways in which
computers can—and do—exhibit the same kinds
of behaviors that creative humans do. With special
emphasis on humor and visual arts as application
domains, and looking at evolutionary processes as
particularly valuable for computational creativity,
Boden characterizes creative behaviors in terms of
computer exploration, whether combinatorial and
transformational. The article ends by posing a
question about whether computers can be truly
creative and by pointing out that through AI
research, we now have an understanding of what
sort of phenomenon creativity is.
The article by Gerhard Widmer, Sebastian Flossmann, and Maarten Grachten (“YQX Plays
Chopin”) describes a computer program that
learns to expressively perform classical piano
music. The approach is data intensive and based
on statistical learning. Performing music expressively certainly requires high levels of creativity,
but the authors take a very pragmatic view to the
question of whether their program can be said to

Editorial

be creative or not and claim that “creativity is in
the eye of the beholder.” In fact, the main goal of
the authors is to investigate and better understand music performance as a creative human
behavior by means of AI methods. AI has played
a crucial role in the history of computer music
almost since its beginning in the 1950s. However,
until quite recently, most effort had been on compositional and improvisational systems and little
efforts had been devoted to expressive performance.
The article by Pablo Gervás (“Computational
Approaches to Storytelling and Creativity”) first
addresses the issue of creativity from a general perspective, not only emphasizing the main features
of interest in any creative process, such as novelty,
unexpectedness, and usefulness (or goal satisfaction) of the output of the creative process, but also
considering who is the intended audience and
whether the output is expected to be novel with
respect to previous outputs by the same system (or
only with respect to an inspiring set). He then
focuses on computational creativity and discusses
a number of issues that have been identified as relevant to the computational modeling of creativity
(whether it can be reduced to search or whether it
should involve transforming a space, and to what
extent it is influenced by the social context in
which it takes place). Next he discusses the main
features of interest in storytelling in terms of basic
concepts from literary theory and then reviews
representative storytelling systems and discusses
them both in terms of how they deal with the features of interest in storytelling discussed in the first
part of the paper and in terms of whether they
introduce new additional features that need to be
contemplated.
Chess has been a traditional challenge for AI. It
took longer than expected, but now there is little
controversy about the fact that the best programs
outperform the best human players. At some
recent matches between a series of outstanding
champions and Bushinsky’s and Ban’s Deep Junior
(of course won by the latter, still computer chess
world champion), the most appreciated feature of
the program that emerged in the after-match comments of the losers and of the independent specialized commentators was its creativity. The paper
by Shay Bushinsky (“Deus Ex Machina—A Higher
Creative Species in the Game of Chess”) talks
specifically about that, with a number of very
interesting examples and discussions about the
prospects for the field. Even if it achieved remarkable results, Bushinsky points out that there are
still several challenging developments ahead.
The article by Graeme Ritchie (“Can Computers
Create Humor?”) deals with computational
humor, that is, the field devoted to the automated
generation of humor and to the appreciation of

humor. To some, the field may sound too ambitious: many people view humor as one of the most
intriguing and distinguished forms of intelligence.
In fact, if an artificial system were to produce jokes
and forms of humor of all sorts, it would be based
on the realization of most intelligent capabilities.
The computational humor scope is currently much
narrower, but some interesting forms of humor,
like puns, funny ambiguous references, or for that
matter ironical expressions, can be produced automatically. Ritchie provides an overview of some
realizations, which in fact display a certain level of
creativity, and discusses various aspects involved.
Our final article is a surprise, a kind of special
guest for this issue of AI Magazine. It is a pleasure
to include in this collection of written contributions something different, food for the brain in an
artistic literary form, produced by EWI: an essay in
the style of Douglas Hofstadter. Well, we cannot
say more, you have to read it.
Computational creativity is a very lively subject
area, with many issues still open to debate. For
instance, many people still turn to the Turing test
(and variants of it) to approximate the value of the
artifacts produced by their software. That is, if a
certain number of people cannot determine which
artifacts were produced by computer and which
were produced by a human, then the software is
doing well. Other people believe that the Turing
test is inappropriate for creative software. One has
to ask the question, “Under full disclosure, would
people value the artifacts produced by a computer
as highly as they would the human produced
ones?” In some domains, the answer could be yes:
for instance, a joke is still funny whether or not it
is produced by a computer. In other domains, such
as the visual arts, however, the answer is very likely to be no. This highlights the fact that the production process is taken into account when assessing artworks. Hence, one could argue that such
Turing-style tests are essentially setting the computers up for a fall. “Aha,” says the Turing tester,
“these were produced by a human artist…. And
these were produced by a convicted murderer!” We
hope this makes the point without being too crass.
Building creative software provides both a technical challenge and a societal one. To proceed further, we need to embrace the fact that computers
aren’t human. We should be loud and proud about
the artifacts being produced by our software, not
ashamed that they weren’t produced by humans.
We should celebrate the sophistication of the AI
techniques we’ve employed to endow the software
with creative behavior. And we should help the
general public to appreciate the value of these
computer creations by describing the methods
employed by the software to create them.
New technologies, and in particular artificial
intelligence, are drastically changing the nature of

FALL 2009 13

Editorial

creative processes. Computers are playing very significant roles in creative activities such as music,
architecture, fine arts, and science. Indeed, the
computer is already a canvas, a brush, a musical
instrument, and so on. However, we believe that
we must aim at more ambitious relations between
computers and creativity. Rather than just seeing
the computer as a tool to help human creators, we
could see it as a creative entity in its own right.
Creativity seems mysterious because when we have
creative ideas it is very difficult to explain how we
got them and we often talk about vague notions
like “inspiration” and “intuition” when we try to
explain creativity. The fact that we are not conscious of how a creative idea manifests itself does
not necessarily imply that a scientific explanation
cannot exist. As a matter of fact, we are not aware
of how we perform other activities such as language understanding, pattern recognition, and so
on, but we have better and better AI techniques
able to replicate such activities. We agree with
those that believe that creativity is an advanced
form of our reasoning that involves memory, analogy, learning, and reasoning under constraints,
among others, and is therefore possible to replicate
by means of computers. This special issue addresses the question of the possibility of achieving artificial creativity through some examples of computer programs capable of replicating some aspects
of creative behavior in several areas. We did not
intend to cover the full range of AI approaches to
computational creativity and we could not include
all areas of application. The issue contains details
of projects in the visual arts, music, storytelling,
chess, and humor, in addition to providing an
overview of the recent history of computational
creativity and plenty of fuel for thought from a
philosophical perspective.
To end, a final thought that helps to distinguish
computational creativity research from other areas
of artificial intelligence, and that might provide
some ammunition against people who worry
about our technological future. Good art makes
you think. Whether it is a quick belly laugh at the
punch line from a comedian or an in-depth reflection on the futility of war when viewing a painting
like Picasso’s Guernica, people who create artifacts
do so in the hope that the artifact will make people engage their brains at an emotional or a cognitive level. This could be taken as our stated aim in
computational creativity research: to build
machines that can challenge us through artistic
and scientific means. Of course, this will require
the simulation of intelligence, but simulating
thought processes is only one of our aims: we want
to encourage thought processes in others, which is
where we differ from other areas of AI. And when
someone worries about the human race losing the
ability to think for themselves because of smart

14

AI MAGAZINE

machines, please mention the automated painters,
writers, composers, and scientists we’re building
specifically to encourage them to think more.

Note
1. See creative-systems.dei.uc.pt/icccx.

Simon Colton (www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~sgc) is a senior lecturer in computing at Imperial College, London. He leads
the Computational Creativity Group, which investigates
the application of AI and human-computer interaction
techniques to creative applications in mathematics,
graphic design, the visual arts, and video game design. In
particular, Colton has developed the HR system, which
has produced mathematical discoveries worthy of the
mathematical literature; is currently working with video
games companies on developing adaptive games; and has
developed the Painting Fool, an automated artist that he
hopes will be taken seriously as a creative painter in its
own right—one day (www.thepaintingfool.com). He
served on the AISB committee from 2001 to 2007, serves
on the automated reasoning workshop committee and
the Computational Creativity Conference steering group,
and is one of the leaders of the AI and Games Academic/Industry research network. He is the author of more
than 100 research papers and his research has won
awards both nationally (BCS/CPHC distinguished dissertation award 2001) and internationally (AAAI best paper
award 2000).
Ramon López de Mántaras (www.iiia.csic.es/ ~mantaras) is a research professor of the CSIC (Spanish National Research Council) and director of the Artificial Intelligence Research Institute of the CSIC. He holds an M.Sc.
in computer science from the University of California
Berkeley, a Ph.D. in physics from the University of
Toulouse III, and a Ph.D. in computer science from the
Technical University of Barcelona. His research focuses
on case-based reasoning, autonomous robots, and AI and
music. Former editor-in-chief of Artificial Intelligence Communications, he is currently associate editor of the Artificial Intelligence Journal and editorial board member of other international journals including the Autonomous
Robots Journal and AI Magazine. He is an ECCAI Fellow
and recipient of several awards including the City of
Barcelona Research Prize. He was president of the Board
of Trustees of IJCAI from 2007 to 2009.
Oliviero Stock (cit.fbk.eu/stock) is an Istitutoper la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica (IRST) senior fellow. He has
been at IRST since 1988 and was its director from 1997 to
2001. His activity is mainly in AI, natural language processing (including verbal humor), intelligent interfaces,
and cognitive technologies. He is the author of 200 peerreviewed papers and author or editor of 12 volumes. He
has also been an invited speaker at over 60 conferences
and participant or coordinator at over 20 panels. He has
been chairman of the European Coordinating Committee for AI, president of the Association for Computational Linguistics and of the Italian AI Association, and is an
ECCAI Fellow and an AAAI Fellow.

