Three Next Generation Approaches to Automated Mathematical Theory Formation
Simon Colton
Computational Creativity Group,
Department of Computing, Imperial College, London
www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~sgc
Around a decade ago, we introduced Automated Theory Formation as a technique for
mathematical discovery, implemented in the HR system. Starting with some basic
background information such as a set of axioms for an algebraic domain, or fundamental
concepts such as addition and multiplication in number theory, HR forms concepts which
categorise the examples; makes conjectures which relate the concepts; and generates
proofs which explain the conjectures (or counterexamples which disprove them). In
addition to inventing concepts and discovering theorems which have been published in the
mathematical literature, HR has been applied successfully to AI tasks including constraint
solving and machine learning. In the talk, I will describe three PhD projects which have
been influenced by the Automated Theory Formation approach.
The first project is the work of Alison Pease, and crosses the boundary between Artificial
Intelligence and Philosophy by building and exploring a computational model of notions
from Lakatos's philosophy of mathematics as advocated in his book "Proofs and
Refutations". Via the HRL system, which simulates a classroom environment consisting of
theory formation agents acting as a teacher and a set of students, Pease implemented
methods identified by Lakatos such as strategic withdrawal and monster barring, which
change the theory in reaction to the discovery of a counterexample to a conjecture under
discussion. This led to both an advancement in the state of the art of automated theory
formation, and a clarification of some of the issues raised and methods introduced by
Lakatos.
The HR system is driven by production rules which turn old concepts into new ones. In his
PhD work, Pedro Torres has addressed the meta-level question of automating the
generation of production rules. Given a seed theory which contains fundamental
background information and exemplar concepts known to be of interest in the domain, with
his Suricata system, Torres has implemented methods for analysing the seed theory and
deriving production rules which can be used to generate the exemplar concepts from the
background material. We are currently investigating the potential of this method to
streamline theory formation, so that, in addition to recreating the exemplar concepts,
Suricata is able to generate focused theories with a high yield of interesting
concepts and conjectures.
The combination of reasoning techniques such as induction, deduction and constraint
solving has always been at the heart of automated theory formation. Taking inspiration
from the Global Workspace Architecture model of human thought processing advocated by
Baars and others in Cognitive Science communities, John Charnley implemented the GC
framework for combining AI reasoning systems in a systematic, straightforward way. By
removing the communication between processes in favour of a very pared-down
blackboard-style system, Charnley has shown that complex combinations of reasoning can
be achieved with relatively little effort from the system designer. He has configured his
framework to undertake the tasks previously tackled by ad-hoc combined reasoning
systems such as HR. This has the benefit of greatly simplifying the construction of
combined reasoning systems, and can also take advantage of the
natural parallelisation afforded by the Global Workspace approach.

