The Comprehensive Terrorism Knowledge Base in Cyc
Chris Deaton, Blake Shepard, Charles Klein,
Corrinne Mayans, Brett Summers, Antoine Brusseau, Michael Witbrock, Doug Lenat
Cycorp, Inc., 3721 Executive Center Drive, Suite 100, Austin, Texas, 78731, USA
{cdeaton,blake,klein,cmayans,bsummers,brusseau,witbrock,lenat}@cyc.com
Keywords: Question Answering, Structured Argumentation, Social Analysis, Temporal Analysis, terrorism
Abstract
This paper describes the comprehensive TerrorTM
TM
ism Knowledge Base (TKB ) which will ultimately contain all relevant knowledge about
terrorist groups, their members, leaders, affiliations, etc., and full descriptions of specific terrorist events. Led by world-class experts in terrorism, knowledge enterers have, with simple
tools, been building the TKB at the rate of up to
100 assertions per person-hour. The knowledge
is stored in a manner suitable for computer understanding and reasoning. The TKB also utilizes its reasoning modules to integrate data and
correlate observations, generate scenarios, answer questions and compose explanations.

1. Introduction
For the past 18 months, we have been building the comTM
TM
prehensive Terrorism Knowledge Base (TKB ). The
TKB will ultimately contain all relevant knowledge (beginning with unclassified knowledge) about terrorist
groups, their members, leaders, ideology, founders, sponsors, affiliations, facilities, locations, finances, capabilities, intentions, behaviors, tactics, and full descriptions of
specific terrorist events. Led by world-class experts in
terrorism supplied by SAIC, knowledge enterers have
been building the TKB at the rate of up to 100 assertions
per person-hour. The TKB knowledge entry tools are
simple enough for unassisted domain experts to use.
However, the knowledge entered has not been limited to
simple database entries, but rather is stored as statements
in mathematical logic, suitable for computer understanding and reasoning. In fact, the TKB has a growing complement of reasoning modules for integrating data and
correlating observations, generating scenarios, answering
questions and composing explanations. The TKB will be
the first fully computer-understandable terrorist knowledge base capable of supporting computer reasoning to
aid analysts.

2. Building the TKB in Cyc
The TKB is an augmentation of the existing Cyc®
Knowledge Base (Cyc KB) (Lenat and Guha 1990; Guha
1995), which has been under intensive construction for
the past 20 years. Most of the current content of the Cyc

KB consists of general facts about many kinds of everyday objects and activities. It also contains “almanacstyle” facts about individual countries, ethnic groups and
organizations. Prior to launching the development of the
TKB, the Cyc KB already had a substantial amount of
knowledge relevant to terrorist activity. All of this
knowledge is encoded in CycL, a language with the expressivity of higher-order predicate calculus.
The TKB effort has so far added to the Cyc KB knowledge of over two thousand terrorists, over seven hundred
terrorist groups and over sixty-five hundred terrorist attacks. The representations of these individuals, groups
and events are involved in over two hundred thousand
TKB assertions such as “Xavier Djaffor participated in
the Jihad from 1996 to 2000” and “Lashkar-e-Taiba is an
Islamist terror group founded in 1990”.
Subject-matter experts reading wire service reports,
newspaper articles, etc., record information in the fields
of the “Fact Entry Tool” (FET), which operates very
much like a web form. The FET user looks up or creates
some particular individual – a terrorist, terrorist attack, or
terrorist group – and then enters information about that
individual by filling in particular FET fields. In some
cases, values for the fields can be selected by choosing
them from a drop-down menu. The FET user can also
type ordinary English into these fields, and the system
will parse that English text into a representation in CycL.
For example, if the user is prompted to enter the name of
a person and a representation of the individual already
exists in the TKB, the system parses the individual’s
name to the unique TKB knowledge structure that represents it. For example, “Ousama bin Laden” and “Usama
bin Ladin” (among dozens of other strings) automatically
parse to the CycL datastructure, OsamaBinLaden. If a
representation of the individual does not already exist in
the TKB, then the new individual is created.
Each assertion has its source (a web page, an expert, a
newspaper article, etc.) associated with it and the source
itself is represented as a first class object with assertions
describing its name, date of issue, and its author or publisher (if relevant). Further, we keep track of which expert entered which data from each source, and when.
In addition to containing knowledge that has been entered through the FET, the TKB can also automatically
access knowledge contained in any structured database
by leveraging Cyc’s Semantic Knowledge Source Integration (SKSI) technology (Masters and Güngördü,

“What terrorists and biological
agents are such that the terrorist is
capable of learning to make the
biological agent?”
The underlined terms in this text
are replaceable from within the
Query Library Tool. The user, for
example, could replace “biological agents” with a term that refers
to a more specific collection (such
as “fungal biological agents”).

4. Future Work

Figure 1. The Query Library
2003). Instead of composing distinct queries against
various databases, analysts can query the TKB once,
thereby accessing knowledge in the TKB as well as any
of its virtual knowledge that actually resides in external
semantically integrated databases or other sources.

3. Leveraging Cyc-style Inference
The Query Library is an interface to Cyc’s inference capabilities (Figure 1). It enables users to ask queries
against the TKB using query templates, which themselves are stored in the TKB. Query templates are saved
with certain default values that users can replace by (1)
entering English terms that Cyc parses into the appropriate CycL constants, or (2) using dedicated ontology
browsing and search tools to find the desired term. The
Query Library generates the appropriate English for the
query so the user need never interact with the underlying
CycL representations. For instance, a query to determine
who is capable of learning to manufacture biological
agents would be represented in CycL as follows:
(and
(isa ?T Terrorist)
(isa ?TOX BiologicalAgentType)
(makingTypeOfType ?PROD ?TOX)
(capableOfLearningTo ?T ?PROD performedBy))

However, the user would see the following:

Representing the relevant data
using the FET is quite fast, but it
still requires effort from subjectmatter experts. A mechanism for
automatically retrieving the relevant information from naturallanguage reports is a logical improvement in the process. Current
work is focusing on improving
natural language retrieval technologies for the TKB; we expect
to achieve substantial gains by
improving the TKB’s integration
with information extraction technologies (Appelt and
Israel 1999).
The TKB will simplify the analyst’s workflow by providing ready access to knowledge that currently must be
inferred by humans from data scattered across disparate
sources. Once the initial TKB is complete, and as the
benefits of an up-to-date TKB become apparent, we expect that analysts themselves will be able to maintain its
currency with a small amount of effort.
References
Appelt, D. E. and Israel, D. J. 1999. Introduction to Information Extraction, a tutorial prepared for IJCAI-99.
http://www.ai.sri.com/~appelt/ie-tutorial/IJCAI99.pdf
Lenat, D. B. and Guha, R. V. 1990. Building Large
Knowledge-Based Systems: Representation and Inference
in the Cyc Project. Addison-Wesley.
Lenat, D. 1995. Steps to Sharing Knowledge, in Toward
Very Large Knowledge Bases, Mars, N.J.I. (ed.) IOS
Press.
Masters, J. and Güngördü, Z. 2003. Semantic Knowledge
Source Integration: A Progress Report. Integration of
Knowledge Intensive Multi agent Systems, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA, 2003.

